International Journal of Fatigue 

A study on the effects of machining-induced residual stress on rolling contact fatigue 
Youngsik Choi * 
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne, FL 32901, USA 
article info abstract 
Article history: 
Received 29 January 2009 Received in revised form 28 April 2009 Accepted 1 May 2009 Available online 9 May 2009 
Keywords: 
Rolling contact fatigue Residual stresses Hard machining Machining parameters Optimization 
ABSTRACT
This study investigates the effects of machining-induced residual stress on rolling contact fatigue of hard machined components. The rolling contact fatigue life predictions demonstrate that the fatigue life is influenced by residual stresses significantly and that tool nose radius can contribute to the optimization of machining parameters to enhance the fatigue performance of hard machined components. The rolling contact fatigue test results show that the prediction accuracy of the fatigue life model can be enhanced signi.cantly by incorporating residual stresses. It is further noted that residual stresses in.uence the roll-ing contact fatigue life by more than 40%. The results demonstrate that the rolling contact fatigue perfor-mance of hard machined 
components can be enhanced signi.cantly by optimizing the residual stress distribution below the machined surface.
﹝ 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
INTRODUCTION
1. Introduction 
Hard turning is an alternative process for making precision components. Compared with grinding, it has many advantages in terms of the number of processes, processing time, material han-dling time, set-up time, equipment cost, and the .exibility of sys-tem. However, the implementation of hard turning as a .nishing process demands an extensive understanding of surface integrity aspects of hard turning. 
It was reported that an increase in the depth of cut yields larger compressive residual stresses on the surface [1]. According to K.nig et al. [2], a larger in-feed increases the depth of the affected zone and the level of compressive residual stresses. An experimen-tal study [3] showed that hard turning induces more compressive residual stresses than grinding. Tool edge geometry was found to be the dominant factor deciding the residual stress pro.le [4]. Re-cently, Hua et al. [5] argued that an optimal tool edge geometry and aggressive feedrate increase compressive residual stresses. 
Based on a residual stress model, an optimal residual stress dis-tribution was put forward by Mittal and Liu [6] 
to enhance the roll-ing contact fatigue performance of super.nish hard turned surfaces. A .nite element simulation demonstrated that residual stresses of hard turned surface can be changed to a better state by optimizing the second cut [7]. Recently, Zhang et al. [8] demon-strated that a model based on back-propagation neural network can predict residual stress pro.les of hard turned surfaces more accurately than conventional linear regression method. 
It was reported that the maximum modi.ed equivalent stress is a better predictor for the rolling contact fatigue life of hard ma-chined surfaces than the maximum Hertzian stress [9]. Guo and Yen [10] found that the slope of a compressive residual stress pro-.le is an important factor for rolling contact fatigue damage. Addi-tionally, a .nite element simulation [11] showed that multi-axial fatigue damage parameters can characterize the relative fatigue damage under the in.uence of machining-induced residual stress pro.les. 
A rehardening burn layer was observed after cutting a steel of hardness 53 HRC by using a ceramic chamfered tool, but this layer was not found in the case of machining with a sharp tool [12,13]. The rehardening burn layer is resistant to the etching in contrast to the bulk material, hence called commonly as a ＆＆White Layer§. It was also noted that white layers were not formed if the tool wear was below 0.15 mm [14]. The alteration of the chemical composition of ASTM 5115 steel was investigated when white layers were produced by hard machining, and no element concentration transition from the over-tempered layer to white layers was found [15]. Recently, it was reported that white layer forms whenever the austenitisation temperature of the material is exceeded on the machined surface [16]. Surface .nish of hard turned surfaces was found to be at least as good as that of ground surfaces as a result of minimal plastic .ow and the absence of a built up edge due to the high hardness of material [17]. This .nding was further investigated in hard turning of AISI 52100 steel, and surface .nish was found to deteriorate with the increase of tool .ank wear [18]. 
The feasibility of replacing abrasion-based super.nishing with hard turning was demonstrated [19,20]. Agha and Liu [21] found that the deterministic nature of hard turning results in more con-sistent repeatability of the fatigue life in rolling contact. It was fur-ther reported that the selection of machining parameters can greatly affect the rolling contact fatigue life [22]. 
The .ndings are due to the deterministic nature of the residual stress distribution below hard turned surfaces. Since the fatigue life is in.uenced by the residual stress distribution, hard turned surfaces show more consistent repeatability of the rolling contact fatigue life. Furthermore, the machining parameters affect the roll-ing contact fatigue life signi.cantly as the residual stress distribu-tion is in.uenced by the machining parameters. 
Although the in.uence of residual stresses on the fatigue life of hard machined surfaces has been investigated analytically [6,9每 
11,22], an experimental and analytical study on the effects of resid-ual stresses induced at various machining parameters on the fati-gue parameters has not been explored. 
This study aims to investigate the effects of residual stresses in-duced at various machining parameters on the fatigue parameters, such as crack initiation depth, maximum shear stress at crack ini-tiation depth, crack initiation life, crack propagation life, and fati-gue life, by both experimental and analytical work. The residual stress distributions below hard machined surfaces are investigated. The fatigue parameters are then computed based on the residual stress distribution to investigate the effects of machining-induced residual stress on rolling contact fatigue performance. Lastly, the rolling contact fatigue tests are performed to substantiate the computations. 
METHOD
2. Experimental 
2.1. Specimen preparation 
Specimens of through hardened AISI 1053 steel were prepared for the experiment, since this steel is used for bearing applications. The composition of AISI 1053 steel is given in Table 
1. The dimen-sions of the specimen were selected to minimize de.ection by the chucking forces of a standard jaw and to be uniformly through hardened [23]. The selected dimensions are shown in Fig. 1. 
2.2. Machining parameters 
The cutting tool used in the experiment was a cubic boron nitride (CBN) tool with a tool nose radius of 0.79, 1.59, or 
4.76 mm. Three different tool chamfer angles were used: 0∼,15∼, 20∼. The machining parameters, such as cutting speed, feedrate, depth of cut, and coolant type, were selected according to Taguchi＊s orthogonal array [24] 
that was employed to distribute the effect of machining parameters on surface integrity evenly. 
Ten different combinations of machining parameters were determined, and the specimens were numbered sequentially according to the combinations of machining parameters (Table 2). 

2.3. Residual stress measurement 
X-ray diffraction method was used to measure the residual stress distribution in the subsurface of specimens. A Denver-Proto 
Table 1 
Composition (%) of specimens. 
Material C Mn P S 

Circumferential direction (Cutting direction) 
Radial direction (Feed direction) 


Dimensions in mm 

Fig. 1. Dimensions of specimen and directions of residual stress measurement. 
XRD 3000 residual stress analyzer was used with a Cr Ka radiation tube. The sin2 w technique, which is elaborated by Noyan and Co-hen [25], was applied to compute the residual stress value. Nine w angles were used for the computation: 20∼, 15∼, 10∼, 5∼,0∼, 5∼,10∼,15∼, and 20∼. Residual stresses were measured in two direc-tions: circumferential and radial. Fig. 1 shows the directions of the residual stress measurement. Residual stresses were measured at the exposed surface and .ve different depths: 5.08, 12.7, 25.4, 50.8, and 127 lm. 
A particular amount of a layer was removed with the help of an electrolytic etcher, saturated NaCl solution, to measure residual stresses at different depths. The machined surface was masked by using an etching mould made with a silicone rubber to avoid etching the whole surface. Since pure NaCl leaves a patterned appearance on the surface by a corrosive effect, a little amount of soap was added to the electrolyte to prevent this effect. The thick-ness of the specimen was measured to check the removed amount of a layer after each etching. 

2.4. Rolling contact fatigue test 
A special test rig was used to perform rolling contact fatigue tests. The tests were performed in a temperature-controlled room that was set to 25 ∼C. The thrust ball bearing, which has Grade 25 balls of 3.69 mm diameter, was used in the test. This bearing was inserted between two specimens. The upper specimen was rotated at 1840 rpm, and the lower specimen was .xed in the test rig. An axial load that produces a maximum Hertzian stress of 2720 MPa was imposed on the upper specimen. 
SAE-30 lubrication oil was circulated through a 0.25 lm .l-tered-pump feed system at a rate of 56.8 cm3/min. The bearing and the specimens were immersed in this lubricant while a test was run. Fig. 
2 shows a schematic diagram of the rolling contact fa-tigue test rig. The experimental lives by this test rig showed less than 10每17% differences with those by the Falex multi-specimen rolling fatigue tester [21]. 
The rolling contact fatigue test was monitored by an accelerom-eter connected to a vibration meter. The vibration signal, which is in.uenced by both the upper and lower specimens, was acquired by the data acquisition system during the test. The vibration 

Table 2 
Machining parameters. 
Specimen  Tool nose radius (mm)  Tool chamfer angle (∼)  Cutting speed (m/s)  Feedrate (mm/rev)  Depth of cut (mm)  Coolant type  

MQL = minimum quantity lubrication. 

threshold level was set to 0.2 g to detect the initiation of a fatigue spall. To enable a reliable comparison, this level was .xed for all the tests. 

METHOD
3. Prediction of rolling contact fatigue life 
For properly lubricated conditions, rolling contact fatigue nor-mally begins with crack initiation in the subsurface. The cracks then propagate by a continued rolling, eventually reaching the ex-posed surface. Subsequently, surface fragments are dislodged, which results in the formation of a spall on the surface. The in-stance is generally de.ned as the initiation of a fatigue spall. 
Choi and Liu [26] proposed a crack initiation life model and a crack propagation life model to predict the initiation of a fatigue spall, and veri.ed the models experimentally [27]. Liu and Choi 
[28] later developed a crack initiation life model based on a dislo-cation model, and they found that this model shows better accu-racy than their previous model. In this paper, the crack initiation life model based on a dislocation model [28] and the crack propa-gation life model [26] are combined to predict the fatigue life. 
3.1. Crack initiation life model Tanaka and Mura [29] proposed a dislocation model for fatigue crack initiation. The simpli.ed form of the model can be expressed as follows: 
Load Shaft 


Accelerometer 
Upper Specimen 

Lubricant In
Bearing Retainer 
Bearing Ball
Lower Specimen 


Lubricant Out 
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of a rolling contact fatigue test rig. 
where Ni is the number of loading cycles to crack initiation, Wc the speci.c fracture energy for a unit area, Ds the range of local shear stress, sk the frictional stress, and A is a function depending on the material properties and the type of initial cracks. A can be writ-ten as [30]: 

where Gh is the shear modulus of homogeneous media, Gi the shear modulus of inclusion, m the Poisson ratio, l the semi-length of slip band, m the semi-minor length of elliptical slip band area, and R is the radius of inclusion. 
Subsurface cracks typically initiate from inclusions, which act as a stress raiser [31每34]. The inclusions intensify the local stress, and the periphery of the inclusion is strained, eventually initiating cracks [35]. Fractographic examination of high strength steels shows that the initiation sites for subsurface cracks are always inclusions located in the interior of the material [36]. 
Accordingly, it is assumed that a crack initiates along the inter-face of the inclusion. To further simplify the model, the semi-length of a slip band is assumed to be equal to the semi-minor length of the elliptical slip band area [30,36]. With these assump-tions, the crack initiation life model can be rewritten as follows: 

The local shear stress is replaced by the maximum shear stress, and the crack initiation point is assumed to be where the ratio of maximum shear stress to micro-hardness is highest based on the previous .nding [37]. Based on the measurement of inclusions in Fig. 3 [28], the crack initiating inclusion size is assumed to be 30 lm. Accordingly, the crack initiation life model can be simpli-.ed as follows: 
where I is the initiation constant (I . GiR ) and Dsmax is the range of maximum shear stress during a cycle at the initiation point. Accordingly, the crack initiation life can be predicted by using the maximum shear stress at the initiation point, provided that the initiation constant and the frictional stress of the crack initiation life model are determined. 


3.2. Crack propagation life model 
The crack propagation life model was developed by using the modi.ed Paris＊ formula [26]. A formula was proposed by Paris 

Fig. 3. Cross-sectional view of specimen. 

and Erdogan [38] for the correlation between the crack propaga-tion rate and the stress intensity factor range: 

where a is the half length of the crack, N the number of loading cy-cles, C the material constant, DK the stress intensity factor range, and n is the slope index. 
Paris＊ formula, Eq. (5), is modi.ed, since the crack propagates relatively faster as the local hardness is lower if the stress .eld is identical [39]: 

where Hb and Hl are the Knoop hardness number at the bulk mate-rial and the local Knoop hardness number, respectively. 
Hearle and Johnson [40] 
calculated the mode II stress intensity factors at each end of the crack in the half-space, where the stress .eld over the whole crack is known. The crack geometry used for the calculation of the stress intensity factor is shown in Fig. 4. The corresponding stress intensity factor at the leading tip (KL)is as follows: 
where L is the crack length, sc the net shear stress, and xL is the po-sition of the leading tip. 
The net shear stress (sc) is the stress available to cause stress intensities at the crack tip. The driving force for crack propagation in rolling contact has been postulated to be related to the maxi-mum shear stress, and it was experimentally veri.ed [39,41]. The maximum shear stress is thus assumed to be the net shear stress. 

Fig. 4. Geometry of a crack moving under a stationary load. 

The stress intensity factor range is calculated from the variation of KL at different crack tip positions. The crack propagation life can be calculated by integrating the crack propagation rate from the initial crack size to the .nal crack size. The .nal crack size is de-rived from the crack size when the crack reaches the surface. The crack propagation life model can then be written as follows: 
Z a21


where Np is the crack propagation life in loading cycles, a1 the half length of the initial crack size, a2 the half length of the .nal crack size, and n is the slope index, which is taken as three for bearing steels [42]. 
The half length of the crack can be expressed by using the depth of the leading tip position and the crack propagation angle as follows: 

where zi is the crack initiation depth, z the depth of the leading tip position, and h is the angle that the crack propagation direction makes with the surface, which is taken as 17.2∼ based on the exper-imental observations [23,37]. 

3.3. Rolling contact fatigue life model 
The crack initiation life model is combined with the crack prop-agation life model to predict the fatigue life as follows: 

where N is the fatigue life in number of loading cycles. 

RESULT and DISSCUSSION
4. Results and discussion 
4.1. Residual stresses 
Most specimens typically showed compressive stresses in cir-cumferential and radial directions, while specimen 9 showed ten-sile stresses around the surface in circumferential direction. The residual stress distributions of specimens 3 and 9 are shown in Figs. 5 and 6. 
The peak compressive residual stress was typically located in the range of 5 and 25 lm, and compressive residual stresses were reduced as it goes deeper. The peak compressive residual stress ranged between 400 and 1600 MPa, while the residual stress below the depth of 100 lm ranged between 100 and 400 MPa. 
Residual stresses of some specimens showed a similar distribu-tion between circumferential and radial directions. However, residual stresses of other specimens showed an appreciable differ-ence between circumferential and radial directions, especially around the surface. 

4.2. Crack initiation depth 
The crack initiation depth was computed based on subsurface stress distribution. First, the crack initiation depth is computed be-fore residual stresses are taken into account. The crack initiation depth is then computed after residual stresses are taken into ac-count. The computed crack initiation depths are listed in Table 3. 
The crack initiation depth is changed to a deeper location up to 40.6 lm after residual stresses are taken into account, since com-pressive residual stresses move the crack initiation depth deeper by lowering stresses. The effect of residual stresses on crack initia-tion depth is shown to be signi.cant considering that the crack initiation depth is 18.6 lm before residual stresses are taken into account. 
Since the crack initiation depth determines the initial spall size and the crack propagation length required to reach the exposed surface, it will affect the fatigue performance considerably. If the initial spall size is reduced, a greater number of continued loading cycles are required to increase the spall size until the .nal failure. If the crack propagation length required to reach the exposed surface increases, the crack propagation life increases as long as the stress .eld is identical. 

4.3. Maximum shear stress at crack initiation depth 
The maximum shear stress at crack initiation depth was com-puted. First, the maximum shear stress at crack initiation depth 
Table 3 
Crack initiation depth comparison. 
Specimen  zi 
zi = crack initiation depth before residual stresses are taken into account. 
zi,r = crack initiation depth after residual stresses are taken into account. 
is computed before residual stresses are taken into account. The maximum shear stress at crack initiation depth is then computed after residual stresses are taken into account. The maximum shear stresses at crack initiation depth are listed in Table 4. 
The maximum shear stress is generally reduced after residual stresses are taken into account, while the maximum shear stress is increased for specimen 9 due to tensile residual stresses in cir-cumferential direction. The maximum shear stress is reduced up to 421.9 MPa, while the maximum shear stress is 853.8 MPa before residual stresses are taken into account, which demonstrates that about 50% of maximum shear stress can be reduced by residual stresses. The effect of residual stresses on crack initiation life is ex-pected to be signi.cant considering that the maximum shear stress is a key value for crack initiation life. 


4.4. Crack initiation life 
The crack initiation life was predicted by using the crack initia-tion life model. First, the crack initiation life is predicted before residual stresses are taken into account. The crack initiation life is then predicted after residual stresses are taken into account. The predicted crack initiation lives are listed in Table 5. The crack initiation life is generally increased after residual stresses are taken into account, while specimen 9 shows the con-trary, as expected from the maximum shear stresses at crack initi-ation depth. The crack initiation life is increased up to 4.73E+06, while the crack initiation life is 3.66E+05 before residual stresses are taken into account: residual stresses can increase the crack ini-tiation life by more than 12 times. 
Since the crack initiation life is dominant for high strength steels, it is conceivable that the residual stress distribution should be controlled to maximize the crack initiation life of rolling contact components made of high strength steels. 


4.5. Crack propagation life 
The crack propagation life was predicted by using the crack propagation life model. First, the crack propagation life is predicted before residual stresses are taken into account. The crack propaga-tion life is then predicted after residual stresses are taken into ac-count. The predicted crack propagation lives are listed in Table 6. 
The crack propagation life is generally increased after residual stresses are taken into account, while specimens 7 and 9 show the contrary. Since the crack propagation life is in.uenced by crack initiation depth and stress .eld, a deeper crack initiation depth does not always increase the crack propagation life. 
The crack propagation life is increased up to 4.34E+05, while the crack propagation life is 4.92E+04 before residual stresses are ta-ken into account: residual stresses can increase the crack propaga-tion life by more than eight times. 
Table 4 
Maximum shear stress comparison. 
Specimen  smax 

Table 5 
Crack initiation life comparison. 
Specimen  Ni 


Table 6 
Crack propagation life comparison. 
Specimen  Np 

Np = crack propagation life before residual stresses are taken into account. 

b 
Np,r = crack propagation life after residual stresses are taken into account. 


4.6. Prediction of rolling contact fatigue life 
The rolling contact fatigue life was predicted by using the roll-ing contact fatigue life model. First, the fatigue life is predicted be-fore residual stresses are taken into account. The fatigue life is then predicted after residual stresses are taken into account. The pre-dicted fatigue lives are listed in Table 
7. 
The fatigue life is generally increased after residual stresses are taken into account. The fatigue life is increased up to 4.98E+06, while the fatigue life is 4.15E+05 before residual stresses are taken into account: residual stresses can increase the fatigue life by around 12 times. The results demonstrate that the rolling contact fatigue performance of rolling contact components can be en-hanced signi.cantly by optimizing the residual stress distribution at the subsurface. 
Depending on the function of rolling contact component, crack initiation life or crack propagation life is dominant for the fatigue 
Table 7 
Predicted rolling contact fatigue life comparison. 
Specimen  Na 

N = predicted rolling contact fatigue life before residual stresses are taken into account. 
b 
Nr = predicted rolling contact fatigue life after residual stresses are taken into account. 
Table 8 
Predicted and experimental rolling contact fatigue lives. 
Specimen  Na 

a 
N = predicted rolling contact fatigue life before residual stresses are taken into account. 
b 
Nr = predicted rolling contact fatigue life after residual stresses are taken into account. 
c 
Ne = experimental rolling contact fatigue life. 

performance. Accordingly, an optimal residual stress distribution varies with the function of rolling contact components. 
From this perspective, if a methodology to optimize the residual stress distribution depending on the function of rolling contact components is established, it will provide an ef.cient way to opti-mize machining parameters to produce an optimal residual stress distribution at the subsurface. 
The fatigue lives of specimens 1, 2, 5, and 6 are shown to be longer than those of other specimens. The machining parameters show that those specimens were machined by using a tool with a tool nose radius of 0.79 mm (smallest tool nose radius in this study), while other machining parameters were not identical. It is thus conceivable that tool nose radius can contribute to the opti-mization of machining parameters to enhance the rolling contact fatigue performance of hard machined components. 

4.7. Rolling contact fatigue test 
The predicted and experimental rolling contact fatigue lives are listed in Table 
8. The ratio of predicted life to experimental life was calculated for the predicted life before residual stresses are taken into account and the predicted life after residual stresses are taken into account (Table 8). 
It is noted that the predicted life before residual stresses are ta-ken into account shows signi.cant under-predictions. The overall average in the ratios for the predicted life after residual stresses are taken into account is 0.80, while that for the predicted life be-fore residual stresses are taken into account is 0.38. 
The assumptions used in the rolling contact fatigue life model contributed to a portion of the prediction inaccuracy. The non-uni-formity of the material properties and tribological conditions need to be addressed by further work to improve the prediction accuracy. 
The .nding demonstrates that the prediction accuracy of the rolling contact fatigue life model can be enhanced signi.cantly by incorporating residual stresses. It is further noted that residual stresses in.uence the rolling contact fatigue life by more than 40% considering that the rolling contact fatigue life model shows rea-sonable accuracy. 

CONCLUSION
5. Conclusions 
Generally, the residual stress distributions of hard machined specimens showed compressive stresses. The peak compressive residual stress was typically located in the range of 5 and 25 lm, and compressive residual stresses were reduced as it goes deeper. 
Y. Choi / International Journal of Fatigue 31 (2009) 1517每1523 
Residual stresses of some specimens showed a similar distribution between circumferential and radial directions, while residual stres-ses of other specimens showed an appreciable difference between circumferential and radial directions, especially around the surface. 
The effect of residual stresses on crack initiation depth was shown to be signi.cant: the crack initiation depth was changed to a deeper location up to 40.6 lm after residual stresses were ta-ken into account, while the crack initiation depth was 18.6 lm be-fore residual stresses were taken into account. The maximum shear stress at crack initiation depth was reduced up to about 50% after residual stresses were taken into account. 
Residual stresses could increase the crack initiation life by more than 12 times, while those could increase the crack propagation life by more than eight times. Consequently, residual stresses could increase the rolling contact fatigue life by around 12 times. 
The predicted lives of specimens machined by using a tool with a tool nose radius of 0.79 mm were longer than those of other spec-imens, which demonstrates that tool nose radius can contribute to the optimization of machining parameters to enhance the rolling contact fatigue performance of hard machined components. 
The rolling contact fatigue test results showed that the predic-tion accuracy of the rolling contact fatigue life model can be en-hanced signi.cantly by incorporating residual stresses and that residual stresses in.uence the rolling contact fatigue life by more than 40%. 
The results demonstrate that the rolling contact fatigue perfor-mance of hard machined components can be enhanced signi.-cantly by optimizing the residual stress distribution below the machined surface. 
References 
[1] Brinksmeier E. Residual stresses in hard metal cutting. In: Conference on residual stresses in science and technology; 1986. p. 839每46. 
[2] K.nig W, Klinger M, Link R. Machining hard materials with geometrically de.ned cutting edges 每 .eld of applications and limitations. Ann CIRP 1990;39(1):61每4. 
[3] Abr.o AM, Aspinwall DK. The surface integrity of turned and ground hardened bearing steel. Wear 1996;196:279每84. 
[4] Matsumoto Y, Hashimoto F, Lahoti G. Surface integrity generated by precision hard turning. Ann CIRP 1999;48(1):59每62. 
[5] Hua J, Umbrello D, Shivpuri R. Investigation of cutting conditions and cutting edge preparations for enhanced compressive subsurface residual stress in the hard turning of bearing steel. J Mater Process Technol 2006;171(2):180每7. 
[6] Mittal S, Liu CR. A method of modeling residual stress in super.nish hard turning. Wear 1998;218:21每33. 
[7] Liu CR, Guo YB. Finite element analysis of the effect of sequential cuts and tool-chip friction on residual stresses in a machined layer. Int J Mech Sci 2000;42:1069每89. 
[8] Zhang JY, Liang SY, Zhang G, Yen D. Modeling of residual stress pro.le in .nish hard turning. Mater Manuf Process 2006;21:39每45. 
[9] Agha SR, Liu CR. On modeling the rolling contact fatigue performance based on residual stresses generated by super.nish hard turning. ASME Med 2000;11:1047每53. 

[10] Guo YB, Yen DW. Hard turning versus grinding 每 the effect of process-induced residual stress on rolling contact. Wear 2004;256:393每9. 
[11] Guo YB, Barkey ME. Modeling of rolling contact fatigue for hard machined components with process-induced residual stress. Int J Fatigue 2004;26:605每13. 
[12] Matsumoto Y, Barash MM, Liu CR. Residual stress in the machined surface of hardened steel. High speed machining; 1984. p. 193每204. 
[13] Matsumoto Y, Barash MM, Liu CR. Cutting mechanism during machining of hardened steel. Mater Sci Technol 
[14] Ogata M. Einsatz von PCBN 	每 Werkzeugen in der production. VDI Berichie
[15] Tonshoff 	HK, Wobker HG, Brandt D. Hard turning 每 In.uences on the workpiece properties. Trans 
[16] Guo YB, Janowski GM. Microstructural characterization of white layers by hard turning and grinding. Trans NAMRI/SME 
[17] Nakayama K, Aria M, Kanda T. Machining characteristics of hard materials. Ann CIRP  
[18] Davies MA, Chou Y, Evans CJ. On chip morphology, tool wear, and cutting mechanics in .nish hard turning. Ann CIRP 
[19] Liu CR, Mittal S. 	Single-step super.nish hard machining: feasibility and feasible cutting conditions. Robot Comput Integ Manuf 
[20] Liu CR, Mittal S. Single-step super.nishing using hard machining resulting in superior surface integrity. J Manuf Syst  
[21] Agha SR, Liu CR. Experimental study on the performance of super.nish hard turned surfaces in rolling contact. Wear 
[22] Liu 	CR, Mittal S. Optimal pre-stressing the surface of a component by super.nish hard turning for maximum fatigue life in rolling contact. Wear 1998;219:128每40. 
[23] Agha SR. Fatigue performance of super.nish hard turned surfaces in rolling contact. Ph.D. Thesis, Purdue University; 2000. 
[24] Taguchi G. 	Taguchi on robust technology development: Bringing quality engineering upstream. ASME Press; 1993. 
[25] Noyan 	IC, Cohen JB. Residual stress: measurement by diffraction and interpretation. Springer-Verlag; 
[26] Choi Y, Liu CR. Rolling contact fatigue life of .nish hard machined surfaces: Part 1. Model development. 
[27] Choi Y, Liu CR. Rolling contact fatigue life of .nish hard machined surfaces: Part 2. Experimental veri.cation
[28] Liu CR, Choi Y. A new methodology for predicting crack initiation life for rolling contact fatigue based on dislocation and crack propagation. Int J Mech Sci 2008;50:117每23. 
[29] Tanaka K, Mura T. Dislocation model for fatigue crack initiation. J Appl Mech 
[30] Zhou RS, Cheng HS, Mura T. Micropitting in rolling and sliding contact under mixed lubrication. J Tribol 
[31] Kaynak C, Ankara A, Baker TJ. Initiation and early growth of short fatigue cracks at inclusions. Mater Sci Technol 
[32] Melander A. A .nite element study of short cracks with different inclusion types under rolling contact fatigue load. Int J Fatigue 
[33] Nelias D, Dumont ML, Champiot F, Vincent A, Girodin D, Fougeres R, et al. Role of inclusions, surface roughness and operating conditions on rolling contact fatigue. J Tribol 1999;121:240每51. 
[34] Bormetti E, Donzella G, Mazzu A. Surface and subsurface cracks in rolling contact fatigue of hardened components. Tribol Trans 
[35] Harris TA. Rolling bearing analysis. New York: Wiley-Interscience; 
[36] Wang QY, Bathias C, Kawagoishi N, Chen Q. Effect of inclusion on subsurface crack initiation and gigacycle fatigue strength. Int J Fatigue 
[37] Leng X, Chen Q, Shao E. Initiation and propagation of case crushing cracks in rolling contact fatigue. Wear 
[38] Paris P, Erdogan F. A critical analysis of crack propagation laws. J Basic Eng 
[39] Chen Q, Leng X, Shao E. In.uence of microstructure and residual stress on the stages of case crushing. Wear 
[40] Hearle AD, Johnson KL. Mode II stress intensity factors for a crack parallel to the surface of an elastic half-space subjected to a moving point load. J Mech Phys Solids 
[41] Jiang B, Zheng X, Wang M. Calculation for rolling contact fatigue life and strength of case-hardened gear materials by computer. J Test Evaluat 
[42] Averbach BL. Fracture of bearing steels. Metal progress; December 





Simulation of curing process of carbon/epoxy composite during autoclave degassing molding by considering phase changes of epoxy resin 
Strain monitoring of a carbon/epoxy composite cross-ply laminate during thermoforming was conducted by using .ber Bragg grating (FBG) sensors. The entire process was simulated by employing .nite element analysis (FEA) by taking into consideration the phase changes of the epoxy resin. For the precise simulation of the curing process, a dielectrometry sensor was used to detect the epoxy-resin dissipation factor, which in turn was used to identify the curing point. To investigate the phase changes and consolidation of the composite laminate by employing FEA, modulus changes with tem-perature were measured by dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA), and the permeability was estimated by measuring the .ber volume fraction according to the curing temperature. As the epoxy resin changed from a liquid to solid phase, the strain generated along the carbon .bers dynamically changed, and the analysis results generally predicted the strain variation quite well. To apply this simulation technique to practical structures, a composite-aluminum hybrid wheel was analyzed and experimentally verfied. 
1. Introduction 
The excellent mechanical properties of .brous composites have enabled them to be applied to the design of various structures, in which their performance has been closely investigated. However, a variation in some factors, particularly, residual stressda crucial factordduring the forming process may ultimately affect the performance of the .nal product. In order to investigate the effect of material behavior during a forming process on the per-formance of the .nal product, signi.cant research on thermo-forming processes has been conducted, e.g., on a smart cure cycle for controlling temperature overshoot [4], simulation techniques for composite laminates, incorporation of consolidation and thickness variation [5,6], and forming techniques that take the resin viscosity into account [7e9]. 
In addition, intensive research into different forming processes has also been carried out. An optimal cure cycle to minimize residual stress and strain has been previously proposed, with strain variation during thermoforming being observed and closely 
investigated using .ber Bragg grating (FBG) optical sensors. This cycle takes into account the effect of thermal property differences between the composite laminate and the mold, the micro-structures of fabric composites, boundary conditions, and differences in the coef.cient of thermal expansion between different materials. Health monitoring of composite structures
and cure monitoring of composite-metal hybrid structures 
using various sensors have also been conducted to detect any material failures during service or forming conditions. Recently, the .eld of application of FBG sensors has been broadened to include real-time health monitoring of structures such as airplanes and ships. The performance validation of FBG sensors, including their endurance limit, was also veri.ed by comparing them with conven-tional sensors by performing various mechanical tests. 
This paper presents the simulation of the curing of a carbon/ epoxy laminate by taking into consideration the phase changes of the epoxy resin and the corresponding material property changes in the laminate. The strain and temperature change in the com-posite laminate was monitored during the curing process using FBG sensors, and the residual thermal strain also was measured. The simple technique for simulating the entire curing process with simple mechanical properties was developed using .nite 
element analysis (FEA) with a user's subroutine, which predicted well the overall change in the generated strains in the composite laminate during the curing process. This technique may provide design guidance for composite structures, allowing durability to be enhanced by reducing the residual stress and strain of structures. 
2. Experiments for determining parameters for the simulation 
2.1. Materials and sensors 
A carbon/epoxy prepreg (USN125, SK Chemical, Korea) was used to fabricate a laminate specimen. Vacuum bag degassing molding was then used to perform cure monitoring of the composite lami-nate, and all the materials used in the experiment are listed in Table 
The material properties were obtained from a previous research. 
Two types of sensors were used: FBG .ber optic sensors with an interrogator (Micron optics instrument, USA) were used for moni-toring the strain and temperature of composite laminates during curing, and a dielectrometry sensor 
1a; [11]) was used for detecting the degree of cure of the laminate. In order to accurately measure the strain variation with temperature in the composite laminate during curing, the sensor's coef.cient of thermal expan-sion was compensated for in calculating equations: 
2.2. Measurement of the .ber volume fraction 
To estimate the amount of resin extracted during vacuum bag degassing molding, the .ber volume fraction according to tem-perature was measured. Darcy's law
predicts the resin .ow during the curing of composites based on the permeability (ki)of the material, and it is closely related to the material void ratio
strain change, temperature change of the FBG, Bragg grating's 
thermo-optical coef.cient, sensitivity coef.cient of strain, and where rf and ci are the .ber radius and KozenyeCarman constant, sensitivity coef.cient of temperature, respectively. The respectively. The permeability of the composite laminate 
Material properties and measured values of various materials. 
Materials Thermal conductivity (W/mK) Speci.c heat capacity (J/kg K) Density (kg/m3) 
Mechanical properties Epoxy 0.2 1740 1210 Fiber 85.0 700 1750 Steel 60.0 450 8000 Vacuum bag 0.24 1670 1140 Breather 0.007 1350 260 Te.on .lm 0.4 1050 2200 
Materials Density (kg/m3) Young's Modulus (GPa) Poisson's ratio Elongation (%) 
Mechanical properties USN125 1480 E1 131.0 n12 0.0226 1.8 E2 10.5 n23 0.0226 E3 10.5 n31 0.4700 
Aluminum 2700 68.9 0.33 17.0 
Materials 125C 105C 85 C 65 C 45 C 25 C 
CTE for temperature (10 6/ C) USN125 L 2.21 1.85 1.66 1.49 1.31 1.09 T 62.82 48.42 37.44 29.79 25.20 23.80 Aluminum 23.76 23.49 23.29 23.09 22.91 22.86 Steel 12.82 12.40 12.24 12.02 11.72 11.56 
Temperature ( C) Fiber volume fraction Permeability 
Vf and permeability for temperature 25 0.55 0.8181 55 0.56 0.7857 80 0.58 0.7241 100 0.60 0.6666 125 0.61 0.6339 
Image of Fig. 1
Property variation of carbon/epoxy prepreg: (a) dielectrometry sensor and corresponding equivalent circuit and (b) variation of moduli and dissipation factor with temperature. 
corresponding to the forming temperature was calculated using Eq. 
2.3. Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) (5), and the values are listed in Table 
1. 
This permeability was used to simulate the thermoforming process of the composite laminates, Storage and loss moduli of the composite laminates at different based on previously identi.ed resin .ow behavior. The .ber temperatures were measured by a Dynamic Mechanical Analysis volume fraction was saturated at a value of 0.61 when the test (DMA) machine (Triton Technology, UK). A short beam specimen of temperature reached 125 C, generating a saturated permeability of stacked carbon/epoxy prepregs was mounted on the machine, and 0.6339. Beyond this point, the epoxy resin was regarded as having the test temperature was raised to 160 C at a rate of 1 C/min, with entered the gelation phase. a driving frequency of 1 Hz. The measured moduli are plotted in Fig. 
1b, and this data was subsequently used to simulate the forming process. 
2.4. Strain measurement of a carbon/epoxy laminate during thermoforming 
Real time in-situ strain variation in a composite laminate dur-ing vacuum bag degassing molding was investigated experimen-tally using FBG .ber optic sensors. The stacking sequence of the laminate was [05/905]s, and sensors were inserted between the third and the fourth plies along the 0 .bers, and 10th and 11th plies along the 90 .bers, as illustrated in Fig. 
2a. A dielectrometry sensor was also inserted at the edge of the laminate. A pair of steel plates was then applied to the laminate, and various accessories such as a Te.on .lm were applied to both surfaces as shown in Fig. 
2a. In order to ensure easy demolding of the composite laminate, a releasing agent was sprayed onto the surfaces of the steel mold. Wavelength shifts, which can be used to calculate strain using Eqs. 
(1) 
and 
(2), were measured for different forming time by an interrogator. In addition, the equivalent resistance and capacitance of the epoxy-impregnated dielectrometry sensor. 
1a) were measured by an LCR meter, and these values were substituted in Eq. 
(3) 
to calculate DF. The temperature was also measured by the FBG sensor in the composite laminate. The rec-ommended cure cycle is shown in Fig. 
2b. These measured strains were used for the veri.cation of the simulation technique and its accuracy. 
3. Simulation of the curing process using .nite element analysis 
To estimate the strain variation during the thermoforming of a carbon/epoxy laminate, FEA was conducted using the experimen-tally acquired data introduced in Section 
2, such as the permeability (ki) and modulus at various forming temperatures. These results were later being compared against the cure monitoring test results for verifying the appropriateness of the simulation technique. The .nite element model of the laminate is shown in Fig. 
3a. A com-mercial .nite element codedABAQUS 6.11 with C3D8HT ele-.ow based on Darcy's law was used to determine the material state when the composite laminate was in liquid state. According to the permeability variation of the epoxy resin at a certain temperature appropriate storage modulus was assigned in each FE element by VOIDRI code and the iterative calculation was carried out as shown in Fig. 
3b. 
In Phase III, changes in the coef.cient of thermal expansion and Young's modulus of the cured composite laminate were used in the FEA for precise estimation of strain as done in a related study. Simple Hooke's law was used to calculate material strains because in this phase the laminate was solid state. 
A tie condition between the laminate and steel mold was imposed for Phase I and II analyses resulting in the same strain at the interface, and a contact condition with a friction coef.cient of 
0.2 was applied at the interface between the laminate and steel mold, taking into account the partial demolding that occurred under abrupt temperature changes. And one node at the edge of the FE model was .xed in all directions for the convergence. As a loading condition hydrostatic compression of 0.1 MPa (vacuum) was applied to the FE model. 
4. Veri.cation of the simulation technique 
4.1. Experiments for strain monitoring during curing process 
shows the results of cure monitoring experiments and analyses, in which the strain was measured in 0 and 90 plies along the .bers. To identify the epoxy-resin phase changes corresponding to the curing time, DF was plotted and analyzed along with the strain variation around the onset of phase change of the epoxy resin. The DF and the measured strain were subsequently used to classify the resin phases, as shown in Fig. 
4aeb. The border between Phase I (liquid regime) and Phase II (gelation regime) is identi.ed by a peak in the DF value, which is indicative of large-scale cross-linking in the epoxy resin. 
4.1.1. Phase I 
In Phase I, the lique.ed epoxy resin shrinks under vacuum (hydrostatic compression of 0.1 MPa), generating a negative strain 
mentdwas used, with the number of elements set to 14,400. The of 230m and 223m 
analysis process itself was divided into three phases (Phases I, II, III) based on the different phases of the epoxy resin: Phase I (heating: 25 Cto125 C) is for the liquid phase, Phase II (holding: 125 C) is for the gelation of the epoxy resin, and Phase III (cooling: 125 Cto room temperature) is the solidi.cation phase of the epoxy resin, including vitri.cation. In Phase I, the deformation behavior of the composite laminate was investigated by taking into account the variation in permeability and the modulus of the laminate. To determine the change in permeability by employing FEA, the VOI-DRI code provided by ABAQUS was used. Iterative calculation of the generated strain. 
3b) was carried out by varying the permeability and modulus of the composite laminates. The mate-rial properties and permeability corresponding to the forming temperatures were updated, and once the permeability reached a value of 0.6339, the gelation phase of the epoxy resin was consid-ered to have commenced and the iteration process was terminated. As gelation proceeded in Phase II, the Poisson's ratio of the epoxy follows a trend similar to that observed in previous studies [11,12]. The gradual reduction in the viscosity of the epoxy resin with increasing temperature induces a corresponding negative strain, and this trend abruptly reverses with the instantaneous curing of the epoxy resin; i.e., around the peak DF value, the strain exhibits a minimum value, as shown in Fig. 
4aeb. 
4.1.2. Phase II 
In Phase II, the gelated epoxy resin behaves like rubber stuck to the mold surface, causing compressive strain in the thickness direction and in-plane tensile strain under vacuum conditions. At a constant temperature (125 C), the strain linearly increased with time up to the vitri.cation of the epoxy resin, as shown in Fig. 
4aeb. Consolidation of the laminate continued to occur during this period, which reduced the thickness and resulted in extension along the in-plane direction due to the high Poisson's ratio (0.48). In experiments, maximum tensile strain values of 
resins increased 
to a point (0.48) at which they could be 300m and 330m were measured in the 0 and 90 
regarded as a rubber-like hyperelastic material. The permeability and Young's modulus at a temperature of 125 C were used for calculating strains in the laminate. In those phases (Phase I and Phase II) MooneyeRivlin model was used to simulate the strains to cope with non-linear behavior of epoxy resin as a hyperelastic material and storage moduli according to temperature measured by DMA were used. The VOIDRI code which is able to express resin respectively. 
4.1.3. Phase III 
In Phase III, vitri.cation was observed around 15 min prior to the commencement of the cooling process. However, this short regime of vitri.cation was suf.cient for the epoxy resin to completely so-lidify and become hardened. During this phase, the rate of strain 
Image of Fig. 2
Fig. 2. Details of cure monitoring of a composite laminate and sensor con.guration: (a) preparation for thermoforming of a laminate and (b) recommended cure cycle. 
increase .rst reduced and then abruptly decreased with the onset In Phase III, the thermal residual strain was de.ned by the dif-of cooling. This is presumably caused by stick-slip motion (partial ference between the peak strain in Phase II and the strain when the delamination) at the interface between the composite laminate and cooling process was terminated. As shown in Fig. 
4, the laminate the steel mold, due to the signi.cant difference in thermal expan-strain decreased as the cooling process proceeded, eventually 
sion coef.cients of both materials ( 0.9 mm/m C for 0 ply and reaching 157m and 72m in0 and90 
33
plies, respectively. 
13 mm/m C for a steel mold) under abrupt cooling conditions Consequently, the generated thermal residual strain was 253m 
Fig. 3. Finite element analysis of the curing process of a composite laminate: (a) .nite element model and (b) analysis procedure. Fig. 4. Strain monitoring results: (a) 0 ply along the .ber direction, (b) 90 ply along the .ber direction, and (c) strain variation in materials during cooling (Phase III). 
4.2. Simulation of strain variation during the curing process 5. Engineering practice: simulation of thermoforming of a composite-aluminum hybrid wheel 
4.2.1. Phase I Finite element analysis predicted well the behavior of the 5.1. Simulation 
laminate under compression, showing the minimum strains of 210m and 154m in the 0 and 90 plies, respectively. The rela-To apply the simulation technique to a real composite structure, 
tively substantial difference between the experimentally deter-mined and calculated strain values of the 90 ply that was located in the center of the laminate (see Fig. 
2a), presumably comes from the large degree of deformation caused by resin .ow during this period when the analysis could not accurately simulate the precise mass transfer (see Fig. 
4b). Consequently, FEA with a linear element underestimates the deformation of epoxy in this phase. 
4.2.2. Phase II 
In analyses, a maximum tensile strain of 221m and 172m was 
a composite-aluminum hybrid wheel for a passenger car was selected and the strain variation during thermoforming was measured and evaluated. It is hoped that the results will provide a design guideline for reducing or optimally utilizing the residual stress and strain for realizing better performance in such structures [9,33]. The overall shape and dimensions of the structure are shown in Fig. 
5, and the material properties are listed in Table 
For the simulation of strain during the thermoforming of the hybrid wheel, only a quarter section of the wheel circumference was modeled with surface symmetry at the cutting surfaces. All simulation techniques and procedures were the same as those introduced in 
section 
for the composite laminate. measured in the 0 and 90 plies, respectively. The relatively large error (36% and 48%) between the experimentally measured and 
analyzed results comes from the simpli.ed analysis that only considers the laminate's mechanical behavior corresponding to changes in permeability and does not consider factors such as the 
chemical behavior of the epoxy resin and the interaction between 
the mold and the laminate. However, the overall trends of 
strain variation as per the simulation and measured results were 
5.2. Experiments 
For the experimental evaluation, 16 plies of carbon/epoxy pre-
pregs (USN125, SK Chemical, Korea) were stacked inside the 
aluminum part of a wheel along the hoop direction (0 ) along the 
circumference, as shown in Fig. 
5a. An FBG sensor was inserted 
along the direction of the .bers between the 14th and 15th plies 
similar. 
4.2.3. Phase III 
from the aluminum surface, and a dielectrometry sensor was also inserted into the composite part to monitor the strain and DF. 
5aeb). The forming conditions were the same as those in the case of the composite laminate, with the composite and aluminum parts being bonded by co-cure bonding. The major differences be-
In Phase III, the terminal strains calculated by FEA were 218m 
and 170m in0 and90 
plies, respectively. Consequently, the 
simulated thermal residual strain was 229m and 188m in the tween these two cases were the topology of the structure and the 
bonding characteristics; i.e., the hybrid wheel had a closed form 
0 and 90 plies, respectively, which were quite well estimated by 
the simulation. 
with co-cure bonding between the composite and aluminum, while 
the composite laminate had an open structure with a very weak 
4.3. Evaluation of the simulation in terms of the residual strain 
The 90 plies had a relatively low residual strain owing to their location in the center part of the laminate, which was little affected by steel molds having a much higher CTE (13 mm/m C); on the other hand, the CTE of the .ber direction of carbon/epoxy prepreg is 
0.9 mm/m C. On the other hand, the 0 plies were signi.cantly affected by the mold, since they were in direct contact with it. 
4c). The composite laminate with a stacking sequence of [05/ 905]s has an averaged CTE of 2.52 mm/m C in orthotropic directions; when this averaged CTE is used to calculate strains, it is expected to produce low magnitudes of strain in FEA, as shown in Fig. 
4c. However, from a microscopic point of view, there was strain vari-ation along the thickness direction based on the stacking angle of each ply. 
4c). Therefore, even though the FBG sensor embedded along the .bers tends not to deform the adjacent layers, a difference in CTE along a certain direction (including the steel mold) signi.cantly affects the interaction of certain plies with the sensor, thus resulting in the thermal residual strain in each ply that is shown in Fig. 
From the results of this experimental work and the FEA, the type and level of generated strain during curing was identi.ed and this information may be used to develop a means to reduce thermal residual stress or strain of composite structures by modifying their cure cycle. Through this study, the validity of the simulation tech-nique based on FEA was veri.ed, and its suitability for application to the design of any composite structure was established. 
bonding with the steel mold because of the releasing agent used. These differences generated different behaviors in the composite part during the cooling phase (Phase III). 
5.3. Evaluation and discussion 
6a shows the measured and analyzed strain during the thermoforming of the hybrid wheel, from which it can be seen that in Phases I and II, the trend of strain along .bers is the same as that in the case of composite laminate, as shown in Figs. 
and 
6. The analysis predicted well the generated strain by considering the variation in permeability with temperature. As consolidation of the stacked prepregs proceeds, the strain gradually increases due to the high Poisson's ratio of the gelated epoxy under vacuum conditions. In Phase III, the factors affecting the variation in the magnitude and type of strain generated were many, including contact conditions, anisotropic thermal properties of the com-posite, interactions with the aluminum part, and chemical re-actions such as the cure shrinkage of epoxy resin [34]. The initial strain peak in the cooling phase presumably comes from the negative CTE ( 0.9 mm/m C) of the composite, which was abruptly exposed to room temperature by opening of the auto-clave. Beyond this point, the strain gradually drops due to the shrinkage of the outer aluminum rim with a high CTE (23.76 mm/ m C), which generates radial pressure between the composite and rim parts. 
6b). The strain peak at the beginning of the cooling phase (Phase III) was not accurately predicted by the analysis because the analysis could not predict the local micro-scopic deformation of the composite but simply estimated the macroscopic behavior by considering the interaction between the 
Fig. 5. Cure monitoring of a composite-aluminum hybrid wheel: (a) shape and dimensions and (b) details of cure monitoring. 
aluminum and composite parts. On the other hand, in experi-ments, an FBG sensor was inserted into the outer layers of the composite, thereby allowing local deformation of adjacent layers of the composite laminate to be detected with minimal effect on the aluminum part. This is currently a limitation of the current FE model, which needs to be resolved for accurate analysis especially in the case of complex structures. However, from a qualitative point of view the results reveal that the composite part exhibited tensile strain under a compressive stress environment, which means that the entire structure expanded while the outer aluminum rim still provided pressure to the composite part. Such conditions enhance the fatigue strength of the structure, and therefore this simulation technique can be used to predict the level of residual strain. Furthermore, it also allows for optimal forming processes to be developed, thus leading to better struc-tural design. 
6. Conclusion 
Strain variation in a carbon/epoxy composite laminate ([05/ 905]s) during thermoforming was simulated by .nite element analysis, and for veri.cation, the generated strain was also moni-tored by employing .ber Bragg grating sensors. The generated strain varied dynamically as the phase of the epoxy resin changed from liquid to solid via a gel. The onset of the gelation point was detected by a dielectrometry sensor and indicated by the variation in strain. To simulate the strain variation accurately, the modulus variation with temperature of carbon/epoxy prepregs was measured by a performing dynamic mechanical analysis, and the variation in .ber volume fraction with temperature was measured to calculate the permeability of the composite. Based on the vari-ation in strain and the dissipation factor, the cure process was classi.ed by the three phases: Phase I (liquid), Phase II (gelation), and Phase III (vitri.cation and solidi.cation). Overall, the simulated strain agreed well with the measured values, but a relatively big difference was observed at the phase changing points (liquid to gel), especially with the 90 ply. This difference is presumed to have come from the large deformation of the ply caused by resin .ow during this period, when the analysis could not simulate the exact mass transfer and substantial deformation. In addition, the sub-stantial difference observed between Phase II and Phase III (gel to solid) was because of the simpli.ed analysis that does not consider the chemical behavior of the epoxy resin or the interaction between the mold and the laminate. This is a drawback of the current FE model, which is yet to be addressed. 
Applying the simulation technique to a composite-aluminum hybrid structure produced results similar to those for the com-posite laminate in Phases I and II; however, an abrupt increase in strain was observed from the beginning of cooling phase (Phase III), which is opposite to the trend observed in the laminate. This dif-ference in behavior came about from the difference in the topology of the two structures: i.e., an open shape for the laminate, and closed shape for the wheel. Again, the abrupt strain change at the beginning of cooling was not effectively simulated for the same reasons as those in the case of the composite laminate. However, the simulation did successfully estimate the trend of strain varia-tion and the level of residual strain, which affects the static and fatigue strengths of composite structures. This simulation tech-nique may therefore provide a useful means to reduce residual stress by changing the forming process, and enhancing the struc-tural integrity of composite structures. 
International Journal of Fatigue 

Single-Gear-Tooth Bending Fatigue of HDPE reinforced with short natural fiber
Philippe Blais, Lot. Toubal. 

Innovations Institute in Ecomaterials, Ecoproducts and Ecoenergies 每 Biomass Based, Mechanical Engineering Department, Universit谷 du Qu谷bec 角 Trois-Rivi豕res, 3351 boul. des Forges, Trois-Rivi豕res G9A 5H7, Canada 
ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT 
Keywords: 
Fatigue Short natural .ber High density polyethylene Single gear tooth Life prediction
ABSTRACT
In this study, the mechanical behavior of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) reinforced with short natural .ber was evaluated using a test bench designed to monitor the high-cycle bending-fatigue characteristics of gear teeth. High-resolution imaging and acoustic emission (AE) were used to document crack initiation and propa-gation against the number of cycles for all specimens. Fatigue versus number of cycles was modeled using S每N curves, damage indices and a linearized Weibull distribution. Correlations between the variables are discussed and compared with published data. Crack progression, residual load, and AE show consistent results that track the progressive damage to the material. 
INTRODUCTION
1. Introduction 
Developers of new materials can no longer ignore the impact that these will have on the environment. Product life expectancy, the quantity of each component and its origin must be taken into con-sideration. Most consumer items are currently made with virgin plas-tics, which are usually derived from petroleum. For example, metal gears have been replaced by plastic gears, which o.er a better price/ performance ratio. Despite numerous bene.ts, the intensive use of plastics raises sustainability issues because of the depletion of non-re-newable petroleum resources and the pollution that is generated. 
Reinforcement with short natural .bers is proposed as a way of enhancing the mechanical properties of low-cost plastics and limiting their environmental impact. E.orts to produce this type of composite material date back to the 1980s. It was soon realized that coupling agents were needed in order to obtain performances comparable to those of technical plastics [1,2]. For a proposed composite to serve its purpose, it must be recyclable. Furthermore, the properties must be conserved after multiple injection cycles [3]. 
Optimizing the formulation of composite .llers has been the subject of more recent research [4每12]. Yellow birch is interesting because of its abundance, especially in regions such as Mauricie in the Canadian province of Qu谷bec, where paper production has been a major industry for years [13,14]. It is rarely used in this industry, and its cost would not be a.ected by demand for paper products. Its use in composites would be facilitated by .ber processing technology developed in the 



pulp and paper industry. High-density polyethylene (HDPE) is the preferred matrix for composites because of its low cost compared to other thermoplastics [6] and the possibility of producing it from bio-mass [7,8,12]. The basic mechanical properties and behavior of HDPE/ birch .ber composite have been studied [5每10]. Tension tests have shown the bene.ts of using a coupling agent [6]. In addition to bending tests and acoustic emission, creep and fatigue tests have been used to quantify durability and identify the mechanisms by which the material is damaged [5,7,8]. The four principal modes of damage identi.ed in tensile and bending tests are: matrix micro cracking, matrix/matrix friction, .ber/matrix de-bonding and matrix/.ber friction. Residual load, acoustic energy and crack propagation have been recorded [10]. Correlations are observed between these three damage indices and material lifetime. In terms of lifetime, HDPE/birch .ber composite compares advantageously with polyamide 6 [10]. 
One application suggested for composites is plastic gearing, based on the current uses of technical plastics and the growth of these markets over the years [15]. Gear thermal behavior [16], root stress [17] and critical damage mode [18] have been evaluated. Carbon particles have been found to enhance the friction performance of POM gears [19] by changing the critical fatigue mode at lower material cost. However, carbon is not comparable to short natural .bers. Little information has been published on short-.ber composite gears. The use of natural .ber composites in structural applications is being delayed pending further safety and reliability studies. 
Like carbon-reinforced POM, .ber-reinforced composite costs less 


Received 22 May 2020; Received in revised form 16 July 2020; Accepted 24 July 2020 
Available online 28 July 2020

Fig. 1. Sequence of tests in the evaluation of a new material for gearing applications. 
than the unreinforced plastic while o.ering basic mechanical properties better than those of the plastic, based on thermal behavior and lifetime in gear rotation tests [12]. Mixed damage modes are observed, such as root cracking, thermal surface wear and general thermal degradation. The thermal behavior of the HDPE/birch composite has been evaluated [12], but bending behavior has been examined only using test samples [10]. The next step is to observe how wear evolves in a gear made of the material [20]. In the case of gears, the next most signi.cant cause of failure after thermal e.ects is tooth root fatigue [18]. No studies have been conducted on the single-gear-tooth fatigue behavior of natural .ber composites. To focus on root fatigue, tooth bending is proposed as an intermediate test between three-point-bending [10] and rotating gear tests [12]. 
Fig. 1 shows the progression of the speci.city of gear material fa-tigue tests. Compared to three-point-bending, tooth bending focuses the stress on the tooth base and adds a shear stress component. It di.ers from rotating tests by involving no slippage and almost no thermal e.ect. Plastic gears are used usually in low-torque and long-run appli-cations, where wear and root fatigue are more likely to occur, if the gear train is properly designed. 
Gear tooth deterioration due to bending is di.cult to assess in a high rotation test because of the speed of movement. In addition, some of the deterioration will be due to heat associated with friction. The thermal component is negligible when a single non-moving tooth is tested. Numerous studies show that material fatigue occurs in single teeth in bending tests [21每25] 
using a bench based on SAE standard J1619 [26]. In every case, tooth life ends with root cracking, which is the focus of this study. 
To observe the bending behavior of composite reinforced with birch short .ber in gearing applications, a test bench was designed for op-eration in static and fatigue modes. Material deterioration (i.e. gear tooth root cracking) was monitored throughout the fatigue tests. Two non-destructive evaluation techniques (acoustic emission and digital image correlation) have proven their e.ectiveness in the monitoring of gear tooth root fatigue damage. A Weibull distribution was then used to model the material lifetime probabilities. 
In the sections that follow, we describe the process used to make the gears, the test bench, the static test procedure and the fatigue tests. Static test results for the composite and the unreinforced HDPE are compared. Fatigue data, including damage progression and gear life-time, are compared with published values. Finally, the Weibull dis-tributions are shown for each displacement and compared with the literature. 
METHOD
2. Experimentation 
2.1. Materials and sample production 
Yellow birch thermomechanical wood pulp .ber (Fig. 2) was pre-pared at the Innovations Institute in Ecomaterials, Ecoproducts and Ecoenergies, biomass based (I2E3) at Universit谷 du Qu谷bec 角 Trois-Rivi豕res (UQTR). Wood .ber was dried at 80 ∼C in an air-circulating oven for 24 h and then ground to 20每60 mesh size before use. The .ber aspect ratio (mean length divided by average diameter) classes were obtained by mechanical re.ning and screening and characterized using an OpTest .ber quality analyzer (Table 1). 
The bio-composite consists of a matrix (HDPE), reinforcing material (yellow birch short .ber, average length 0.49 mm, average thickness 24.7 米m) and a coupling agent (maleic-anhydride-grafted polyethylene, aka MAPE) (Fig. 2). Their proportion in mass are 57% of HDPE, 40% of .bers and 3% of MAPE. The material base mechanical properties are shown in Table 
1. Those are experimental mechanical properties obtain during previous studies [6每8,27] at the exception of the MAPE prop-erties and those marked with an asterix. MAPE properties are approx-imate to generic low density polyethylene (LDPE) in which the maleic hydride is dissolved, and the ones marked with an asterix are evaluated using general rule of mixtures. The adapted rule of mixture of La-vengoof-Goettler [27] gives a Young＊s modulus value of 3.31 GPa. This value is lower than the experimental value obtained. Birch .ber Poisson ratio and tensile strength are calculated with the standard rule of mixture since their length doesn＊t allow standard characterization. The HDPE and MAPE were mixed on heated rollers at 190 ∼C (the production process is shown schematically in Fig. 3) and the .bers were added slowly to keep the mixture in a molten state. Once out of the rollers, the composite was ground to granules 1每3 mm in diameter. 
The gear mold was .lled with granules and heated to 190 ∼C. The melted composite was mixed thoroughly before applying 5.5 MPa of pressure for ten minutes. The press was then water cooled. A central hole was drilled in the de-molded gear (Fig.4a). The thickness was 6.35 mm, the diameter was 76.2 mm and the 30 teeth had a diametral pitch of 10 per inch. A tooth was removed to facilitate mounting on the test bench. 
2.2. Mechanical tests 
2.2.1. Quasi-static bending tests 
The main purpose of the static tests was to evaluate the elastic properties, .exural strength and fracture mode of the composite. Three loading speeds were chosen to represent the progression between quasi-static speed and a fatigue test loading speed. A 10 Hz [10] test at 0.5 mm displacement has a speed of 942 mm/min, which is over the maximum of 500 mm/min of our static test machine. The speeds were therefore 500 mm/min, 50 mm/min and 5 mm/min to assess the strain hardening e.ect. These speeds are in accordance with ISO 178:2019 standard practice for plastics determination of .exural properties. An Instron LM-U150 equipped with a 150 kN load cell was used. 
Adjustable to multiple gear sizes and contact points, the single-tooth test bench (Fig. 5) is designed to ensure that the test tooth fails before the locking tooth. The test bench applies the load in a linear motion instead of a circular motion as proposed by the SAE J1619 standard. The main reason is the allowance of future testing on di.erent gear sizes that is easier and cheaper to design with a linear motion. A tri-angular abutment in contact with the former and a square abutment next to the latter oppose the clockwise rotation of the gear. The locking tooth abutment is mounted on a mechanical jack to allow adjustment. A one-tooth separation ensures that the pressure points do not interact. The test tooth abutment is supported horizontally by a bearing to prevent lateral load due to the angle of action relative to the load cell. Therefore, 9 teeth out of 30 can be tested as shown on Fig. 4 
b). The tooth number 3 is tested .rst with tooth number 1 as the locking tooth, 

Fig. 2. Base materials of the proposed composite.  
Table 1 Base material mechanical properties.  Birch 
Elastic modulus (GPa) 13.9 1.27 0.12每0.55 4.48 Elongation at break (%) 每 590 450每810 2.44 Poisson Ratio 0.17* 0.46 每 0.33 Tensile Strength (MPa) 149.67* 22.0 16 38.05 Mean length, L (mm) 0.49 每每 每 Mean width, D (米m) 24.7 每每 每 Aspect ratio (L/D) 19.8 每每 每 
then tooth number 6 with tooth number 4 as the locking tooth and so on. 


2.2.2. Bending fatigue tests 
The same bench was used with an MTS hydraulic machine equipped with a 100 kN load cell. Fatigue tests were performed using displace-ment control. They were performed using sinusoidal displacement control at a 10 Hz loading frequency. The displacement ratio (R = 汛min/汛max) was 0 for these tests. This ratio is chosen because a real gear tooth has its load removed between each gear revolution. The choice of frequency was based on experimental fatigue tests conducted on composite gears at rotational speeds ranging from 500 rpm to 1500 rpm [12] 
and corresponding respectively to 8 Hz and 25 Hz. The minimum value is chosen to obtain an endurance limit and the other values are chosen with the minimal increment. An increment of 
0.03 mm was necessary to ensure that the displacements were distinct, since the low reaction force from the gear lowered the precision of the position reset. The resulting .ve cases are: 0.46 mm, 0.49 mm, 
0.52 mm, 0.55 mm and 0.58 mm. 
The objectives of these tests were to investigate the mechanical behavior of and damage to bio-composite under fatigue loading and to estimate the endurance limit of single gear tooth. A target of 15 samples by load case is .xed to allow further statistical analysis of the cumu-lative damage and its evolution during the fatigue tests. A high-speed charge-coupled device (CCD) camera with a 2D digital image correla-tion system (StrainMaster, LaVision Inc.) and acoustic emission sensors were used to assess crack initiation and evolution. Two acoustic sensors were attached to the gear, as shown in Fig. 
6. An acoustic threshold level set at 30 dB was used to .lter background noise. The quality of the acoustic data mainly depends on the choice of the waveform system timing parameters, namely the peak de.nition time, hit de.nition time and hit lockout time, which were set respectively at 40 米s, 80 米s and 200 米s [5]. Cumulative damage was recorded. The CCD camera was used to record macro-cracks on the gear tooth surface (Fig. 6). The Fig. 3. Schematic summary of the composite production process. 
P. Blais and L. Toubal International Journal of Fatigue 141 (2020) 105857 

Fig. 4. A test gear made of HDPE/birch .ber composite; (a) test gear side view, (b) schematic gear test dimensions and test order. 
camera sensor dimensions were 7.2 mm ℅ 5.4 mm, the resolution was 1628 ℅ 1236 pixels and maximal update rate was 14 frames per second. Images were captured until complete failure of the gear tooth. A precision of 0.02 mm was possible with the camera, but a precision of 
0.2 mm was obtained by the program transferring the data from the images to numerical values. Tooth lifetime was based on crack initia-tion, because of the speed of propagation to 50% of the tooth width. Since crack length was measured only on one side of the gear, it could have been longer below the surface or on the other side, making crack initiation a more objective threshold. 
The three damage indices measured in the fatigue test were crack length, residual load and acoustic emission. Their purpose is to show the progression of damage before and after the crack initiation. Thermal readings were obtained in preliminary tests at each displacement, but were not distinguishable from the thermal camera variance, which is about 3 ∼C. As in previous studies [10], self-heating was neglected. 
The end of the second phase of the residual load was evaluated as a criterion for determining life limit for comparison purposes. The max-imum base tooth stress (考) was estimated using the AGMA equation [28] shown below (1). This equation is accessible since data on each factor are abundant and a single gear tooth is loaded over a small range of its normal use. 
考 is the calculated stress at the base of the tooth, Wt is the tangent load, KO is the overload factor, KV is the dynamic factor, KS the dimensional factor, Pd is the diametral pitch (10 teeth/inch), F is the tooth width 
(0.25 in.), Km is the load distribution factor, KB is the rim thickness factor and J is the form factor. The overload factor is set to compensate for any impact that could occur form the controlled machine or power source. For our experiment, where the gear is .xed and the ※controlled machine§ is a hydraulic fatigue machine. KO is then set to 1. The dy-namic factor is a function of loading speed and material .nish. It gets closer to 1 a smoother .nish and a slower loading speed. It is therefore .xed as 1 [29]. The dimensional factor takes into consideration the tooth width, Lewis geometrical factor and diametral pitch. The calcu-lated value of the dimensional is 0.944, it is then set to 1 according to Budynas and al. [29]. The gear geometry has a diametral pitch of 10 teeth/inch and a width of 0.25 in. The load distribution factor takes into consideration the load non-uniformities over the span of the line of action. Since our test bench loads the tooth at only one point of the line of action, the load distribution factor is set to 1. The gear is not a rim gear, so the rim thickness factor is neglected, and the form factor is equal to 0.26. 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Single-tooth quasi-static loading 
Complete static results are shown in Table 
2. A strain hardening e.ect can be inferred from the increase of the force as the loading speed increases whereas the displacement at failure decreases. These e.ects appear on the typical curve for each loading speed and material shown in Fig. 7. Two materials are being tested for comparison purposes. The composite is the main subject of the study and pure HDPE represents the composite matrix, which is the base material we are trying to en-hance. 
Both materials, either the composite or the pure HDPE show dif-ferent behavior for the same static test and geometry. Pure HDPE shows non-linear behavior before failure, whereas the composite shows fragile behavior. A reason for this e.ect is the pure HDPE plastic deformation. Pure HDPE undergoes considerable plastic deformation, which reduces the concentration of stress at the tooth base by increasing the base 

Fig. 5. The test bench with a sample mounted for fatigue testing (side view). 
Fig. 6. Acoustic emission sensors (left) and side view of the CCD camera setup. 
Table 2 	Table 3 
Single gear tooth results: Static .exural max load and displacement at failure. Quasi-static stress for unreinforced and reinforced HDPE [11]. 



The same e.ect is seen on the stress maxima (Table 3). Unreinforced shows a higher stress at failure than the composite and the three-point-bending equivalent. In addition to elastic deformation reducing the stress concentration, since the stress at the tooth base reaches yield levels, the stress concentration decreases even more as plastic de-Average formation increases. In the case of unreinforced HDPE, the evaluated stress is above the real stress. The evaluated stress doesn＊t consider the plastic deformation and the resulting decrease of the concentration Unreinforced HDPE 
 factor. Reinforced samples show a higher stress maximum than three-point bending, partly due to the indistinguishable local plastic zone that reduces the stress concentration. However, this is not factored into stress calculation. 
 In terms of sti.nesses (Fig. 8), adding .ber to the HDPE matrix  seemed to have little to no impact on the strain hardening e.ect. As mentioned above, birch .ber increased the overall sti.ness of the 
Average thermoplastic. The sti.ness was measured using the linear elastic sec-tion of the load curves obtained for each type of sample. 

3.2. Gear tooth lifetime and damage progression 
The experimental results are summarised in the displacement cycles (汛-N) charts in Fig. 
9, which shows the progression of the number of cycles at crack initiation for each displacement and HDPE content. This 
radius. This leads to a displacement at failure a lot higher than the composite. On the other hand, the composite shows a load nearly twice that of the pure HDPE for the same displacement and loading speed. No concentration relief takes place before the composite resistance is reached, because near to no plastic deformation takes place at the tooth 
Fig. 9. Distribution of gear tooth fatigue at crack initiation. 
standard semi-log fatigue diagram is built by plotting the amplitude of the imposed displacement level 汛 against the number of cycles to crack initiation Nf. The dots represent individual samples and the dotted lines represent Weibull 10%, 50% and 90% failure distribution marks. The displacements are presented as a percentage of the corresponding static failure displacement. An arrowhead at 106 cycles indicates that these specimens did not fail at that displacement level. The high displacement at failure of unreinforced HDPE sets its relative displacement well below that of the reinforced material. The high cycle fatigue strength of reinforced HDPE is about 39% of its ultimate displacement (U汛) and about 18% for unreinforced. The inherent variability of fatigue lifetime may explain in part the rather large degree of scatter apparent in the data. 
For further comparison with previous studies, gear tooth life esti-mated on the basis of the end of the residual load stable phase was considered as the equivalent stress that the tooth would have endured if it had been tested under constant force rather than constant displace-ment. Typical three damage index graphs for both reinforced and un-reinforced material are shown on Fig. 
10. The red circles indicate the end of the residual load second phase end for both materials. Fig. 11 and Table 4 
show that the lifetimes were shorter than estimated pre-viously. This is due to the stress and load measurement methods. 
Table 4 
Second lifetime evaluation and comparison of reinforced samples. 
Stress  Lifetime  Author  

Assuming the use of a full gear matched with a rack or another gear of which the tooth is loaded over its entire length, the AGMA equation underestimates the real stress on the tooth. The test bench used in the present study loads the test tooth only at its tip to ensure that it breaks before the locking tooth, which represents the worst loading case [30]. In addition, the steady phase recorded previously [10] is much .atter than those recorded in the present tests, which would further under-estimate the stress calculated at the end of the phase. 
Since all three 0.46 mm tests reached 106 cycles and showed little to no damage, analysis was limited to the four larger displacement cases, plotted in Fig. 12. The damage index is plotted as the average number of cycles needed to reach a damage level. Error bars show the standard deviation of the damage index at di.erent points of the indices. Pre-vious work by Bravo and al. [12] 
on functional gear train shows that the main cause of failure is root fatigue. The present study emphasizes on root fatigue and the load being applied at the tooth tip makes the lifetimes shorter than the ones recorded by Bravo and al. [12]. The principal reason why this study takes place is to characterize the da-mage progression to root failure and Fig. 11 shows that the root failures obtained during this study show a trend close to the one of a func-tioning gear train. 
The cracking index represents the crack length relative to its max-imum possible length: 


where ICracking is the damage index, tc is the crack length and td is the tooth thickness at the crack location. 
The residual load index is given by: 
RLi (3) where IRL is the residual load damage index, RLN is the current residual load value and RLi is the residual load of the .rst cycle. 

The acoustic emission index is the cumulative number of counts relative to the total number of counts: 

where IAE is the acoustic emission damage index, CN is the current emission number of counts and Cf is the .nal number of counts. 
All three indices obtained are between 0 and 1. A damage index is a dimensionless number which varies from zero to one, and the failure should occur when the index reaches one. The use of indices between 0 and 1 is arbitrary and means an adjustment of the values measured on di.erent scales to a common scale. That will help the comparison be-tween the three indices and with other samples. For a literature com-parison, values up to 50% in sti.ness reduction are used as a failure criterion in long .bre composite materials [31]. 
Some interactions between the indices can be observed. The longer the crack, the lower the sti.ness and the smaller the reaction load. When a crack reached 80% of its possible length, the reaction load was very low, and progression sometimes stopped. If an advancing crack met a bunch of suitably oriented .bers when the residual load was low, it probably stopped [32每34]. If it met few or no such .bers, it grew to more than 90% of the possible length. This is why cracking standard deviation gets larger around 80% of progression. The 0.58 mm case 
P. Blais and L. Toubal does not show this trend because a larger displacement yielded to a larger load and imposed the continuity of the cracking process with a lower probability of stoppage. 
In reinforced HDPE, acoustic emission occurred principally during crack progression. Unlike in unreinforced HDPE, it took place before and during plastic deformation, as shown in Fig. 
10. Fig. 13 shows crack paths in both materials. In reinforced HDPE (b), cracks changed di-rection more, which requires more energy than propagating in a straight line. Much acoustic activity also occurred after the end of crack progression. This is due to friction between crack surfaces. Since ma-trix/matrix friction is known as one of the four damage modes visua-lizable by acoustic emission [5,7], the texture of the crack suggests an abundance of friction. 
Residual load changed in 3 phases: rapid initial decay, a constant phase and a .nal decrease. The initial drop in residual load is due to the cyclic accommodation of HDPE [35] and is followed by degradation at a lower rate. The end of the second phase coincided with crack initia-tion. The third phase started with crack initiation and .nished along with crack progression. 
These phases appear to progress di.erently in three-point bending tests [10]. Crack initiation may span about 30% of the total life of the sample, and the initial and rapid phase may be much shorter. Another stage characterized by the crack progressing faster to failure may occur near the end of the test. No such stage was observed in the present study. 
The main goal is not to enhance the material durability, but to get a better understanding of the damage process. The composite gives an indication of the approaching failure of the tooth. The crack propaga-tion to 40% is fast, but the overall progression is slower than the un-reinforced HDPE. Moreover, the start of acoustic emission correlates with crack initiation. giving another indication of the failure＊s ap-proach. 
3.3. Weibull distribution plotting 
The Weibull distribution is commonly used to describe the prob-ability of material failure. The cumulative Weibull distribution is de-.ned as: 


Where N is the number of load cycles, PR is the probability that the sample is fractured at N cycles, 汐 is the Weibull shape coe.cient and N0 is the characteristic lifetime in load cycles. 
The linearized Weibull distributions illustrated in Fig. 14 show a linear .t with its correlation coe.cient. The dots represent the ex-perimental results. The Weibull shape coe.cient and lifetime are shown in Table 5. A shape coe.cient below 2 for all four cases indicates a broad distribution of lifetime. The values are similar, the lowest corre-sponding to 0.49 mm displacement, at which fatigue was slowest and (logically) the most variable. The characteristic lifetime increased with decreasing displacement, as expected. Distribution width is associated with the material being short .ber composite, due to the major impact of random .ber orientation and local concentration on the mechanical properties and hence the fatigue-determined lifetime [32,36]. 


Table 5 Weibull distribution parameters.  0.49 mm  0.52 mm  0.55 mm  0.58 mm  
N0 (charac. lifetime) 汐 (shape)  132 145 ㊣ 35 233 1.23 ㊣ 0.17  66 664 ㊣ 7 766 1.73 ㊣ 0.10  40 005 ㊣ 10 031 1.57 ㊣ 0.20  23 707 ㊣ 3 222 1.54 ㊣ 0.11  

Fig. shows the experimental (dots) and Weibull (smooth line) cumulative distributions. The four displacement cases are shown and identi.ed with their absolute displacement value in mm and their re-lative to ultimate displacement value in percentage. A two-shoulders distribution can be interpreted from one or two of the distributions. However, the standard Weibull distribution seems satisfactory for the current study since the coe.cient of determination R2 is at least 0.85. For distributions with 12 samples, namely 0.49 mm and 0.55 mm, R2 is respectively 0.85 and 0.86. For those with 15 samples, namely 0.52 mm and 0.58 mm, R2 is respectively 0.96 and 0.95. The fatigue behavior is thus considered with at least 85% con.dence to be of Weibull type. 
CONCLUSION
4. Conclusion 
The HDPE/birch .ber composite material tested in this study could be used to manufacture ecofriendly machine parts at lower cost. The .bres cost is around 1.07 USD$/kg [6], HDPE is at 1.20 USD$/kg, PA66 is around 1.85 USD$/kg, ABS is around 2.50 USD$/kg and PEEK is around 41.00 USD$/kg. The addition of .bers to HDPE reduces the cost of the material which is already lower than the cost of other high re-sistance plastics. Blends containing up to 40% short natural .bers by weight have static mechanical properties comparable to those of poly-amide 66. The material has been tested in bulk form and in rotating gear tests. In this study, it was subjected to the single-gear-tooth bending test, which allows evaluation of bending behavior without friction and thermal degradation. 
The customized test bench allowed static testing at di.erent speeds and comparison of the composite and the pure thermoplastic in terms of fracture behavior and other properties. Fatigue tests run on the same bench with four displacement factors showed the evolution of three damage indices: crack length, residual load and acoustic emission. A large number of specimens were tested, and three damage indices were evaluated to study the fatigue behaviour of single-gear-tooth bending of HDPE reinforced with short natural .ber. Crack progression, residual load and acoustic emission show consistent results that track the pro-gressive damage to the material. Crack initiation appears more suitable for evaluating gear tooth lifetime since subsequent crack progression may be very fast. Cracking slows down when the displacement is .xed, and the reaction load thus decreases as the crack process advances. 
Although the trends were comparable with published results, var-iations in material lifetime were noted. Lifetime was modelled using a linearized form of the Weibull distribution. The model shows a good .t and provides insight into the lifetime distribution of the material under fatigue. Material variability was likely the source of the wide range of responses, since the .ber distribution and orientation are random. 
Future studies will focus on designing an industrial molding process that reduces material variability and brings HDPE/birch .ber compo-site material closer to market readiness. All improvements thus ob-tained will be tested by comparing the composite to pure technical plastic using the gear tooth test described in this study. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing .nancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in.u-ence the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to acknowledge the .nancial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada. 








Surface roughness effects on the fatigue strength of additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V 
Jonathan Peguesa,b, Michael Roachc, R. Scott Williamsonc, Nima Shamsaeia,b,. 

a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, United States b National Center for Additive Manufacturing Excellence (NCAME), Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, United States c Department of Biomedical Materials Science, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, United States 
ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT 
Keywords: 
Additive manufacturing Fatigue behavior Surface roughness Size effects Geometry 
ABSTRACT
Additive manufacturing has become an increasingly popular advanced manufacturing technique, however, many questions concerning the reliability of parts fabricated by methods such as laser powder bed fusion must be addressed. In this research, the e.ect of surface roughness and size is investigated by designing various addi-tively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V specimen geometries. These as-built specimens were designed to speci.cally determine the e.ect of surface area and part diameter on the fatigue behavior of specimens fabricated diagonally from the substrate. Results indicate that the fatigue behavior is more sensitive to part diameter than surface area. Parts with diameters of 4.90 mm or less showed higher surface roughness on the down-skin surface. This var-iation diminished, however, for specimens with diameters larger than 4.90 mm. Additionally, as part diameter decreased, the di.erence between the load-bearing and nominal stress amplitudes, caused by surface roughness, increased, resulting in signi.cant scatter in the high cycle fatigue data. 
INTRODUCTION
1. Introduction 
Additive manufacturing has become an increasingly popular man-ufacturing technique offering large design freedoms and a significant potential for fabricating optimized and customized parts with complex geometries. In the aerospace industry, topology optimization can be utilized to create complex geometries that can reduce weight of struc-tural parts, and thus, e.ectively increasing fuel e.ciency. These com-plex geometries often cannot be fabricated through traditional sub-tractive methods, however, additive manufacturing has shown the ability to produce such geometries [1]. In the biomedical industry, additive manufacturing promises customized parts, per patient/injury, that can be readily tailored to the patient ensuring a better .t. While titanium alloys such as Ti-6Al-4V are commonly used in both aerospace parts and biomedical implants due to their high strength-to-weight ratio, excellent mechanical properties, and biocompatibility [2每5], they are also compatible with additive manufacturing processes because of their weld-ability. One of the major obstacles facing full implementa-tion of additive manufactured (AM) Ti-6Al-4V parts, however, is the concern with the reliability, especially under cyclic loading conditions. While extensive research has been conducted on the fatigue behavior of traditional wrought Ti-6Al-4V [5每12], there are needs for further in-vestigating the fatigue behavior of AM counterparts due to their structural imperfections such as defects/pores and increased surface roughness [13每16]. 
The reliability and durability concerns for AM parts have driven a recent surge of research into the fatigue behavior of AM parts [13每15,17,18]. Defects associated with AM parts such as porosity and lack of fusion can reduce the fatigue life leading to lower endurance limits compared to traditional wrought alloys. Additionally, as-built AM parts have been shown to have even lower fatigue limits when com-pared to parts that underwent post-process machining and polishing [14,15]. This is attributed to the high surface roughness of the as-built parts in which the micro-notches associated with partially melted powders on the surface act as stress concentrators resulting in earlier crack initiation [19]. Parts fabricated diagonally have been shown to have increased surface roughness on the down-skin surface, which can further reduce the fatigue strength of AM parts [20,21]. 
There have been many investigations that attempt to characterize the e.ect of surface roughness on the fatigue behavior of both wrought and AM materials with both conditions showing mixed results [22每27]. Removal of the surface roughness through machining and polishing is necessary for AM parts to achieve fatigue limits that are more com-parable to wrought materials. However, one of the most bene.cial promises of additive manufacturing technology is the ability to manu-facture net shape parts without the need of further subtractive 

machining or polishing. For this reason, it is imperative to better un-derstand the fatigue performance of AM parts fabricated in the net shape condition without any surface enhancements before testing. Additionally, the range of AM part sizes can vary from small medical implants to large structural components in which the fatigue behavior of the net shape parts may di.er between these contrasting sizes. 
The objective of this research is to investigate the e.ect of part size in relation to surface roughness, surface area, and gage diameter on the fatigue behavior of laser-based powder bed fusion (L-PBF) specimens in as-built condition. Directly correlating these specimen properties to the corresponding fatigue performance for various part sizes is critical to reliably design AM parts with the ability to withstand the service loadings associated with a given application. 
METHOD
2. Materials and methods 
A series of .ve specimen geometries were designed to investigate the e.ect of part size on the fatigue behavior of L-PBF Ti-6Al-4V. The five specimen geometries are shown in Fig. 1 and can be separated into two distinct groups. The .rst of these groups maintains constant gage volume while incrementally increasing the gage surface area by 25%. These geometries are referred to as the constant gage volume (CGV) specimens and shown as Geometries 1每3in Fig. 1. In order to maintain the constant volume between Geometries 1每3 while increasing the surface area, the gage diameter and gage lengths were adjusted accordingly. The second specimen group maintains constant gage dia-meter while incrementally increasing the gage surface area by 25% as shown for Geometries 4 and 5 in Fig. 1. These specimens are referred to as the constant gage diameter (CGD) and are designed to account for any e.ect that the change in the gage diameter may have on the fatigue behavior. The sub-sized geometries were chosen to allow each group to be fabricated during the same build to limit variability between tests. 
Parts were fabricated on an EOS M290 (EOS, Krailling, Germany) AM machine with a maximum laser power of 400 W. The process parameters used for fabrication were the suggested performance para-meters provided by EOS for Ti-6Al-4V components. This set of process parameters include a laser power of 280 W, a scan speed of 1200 mm/s, and a hatch distance of 0.140 mm. The powder was supplied by LPW Technology Inc. (LPW, Runcorn, UK) and had a particle size range of 15每45 米m. All specimens were fabricated at an angle of 45∼ from the substrate. Before removal from the substrate, the parts were stress re-lieved at 700 ∼C for one hour, and air cooled to room temperature. The time and temperature were selected to maintain the as-built micro-structure while minimizing the e.ects of residual stress that arise from the high cooling rates associated with L-PBF. 
The surface roughness of the up-skin and down-skin surfaces of each specimen was measured at two areas within the gage section using a Keyence VHX-1000 (Keyence, Osaka, Japan) digital microscope. The down-skin and up-skin surfaces are shown in Fig. 2 (not to scale) and are termed in relation to the build direction. Down-skin refers to sur-faces in which the vertical component of the vector normal to the surface is in the opposite direction of the build progression. This occurs in overhangs or, as in this case, surfaces that are diagonal and directed opposite of the build direction. Up-skin refers to surfaces where the vertical component of the vector normal to the surface is in the same direction as the build progression. Representative measurements for a down-skin surface are schematically shown in Fig. 3 where the 3D surface map was collected from each end of the uniform gage section. Triplicate line measurements were taken from each surface map, re-sulting in six total measurements for each up-skin and down skin surface. The arithmetic mean roughness value (Ra) was calculated for each line measurement and an average for each up-skin or down-skin surface was obtained. Statistical ANOVA (analysis of variance) (汐 = 0.05) was performed on the surface roughness measurements taken from each geometry to determine if the roughness between the given geometries were statistically di.erent. 
Microstructure analysis was performed on representative samples within the gage section. The general microstructure was revealed using Kroll＊s reagent and optical microscopy. Additionally, bulk x-ray dif-fraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy, and electron backscatter di.raction (EBSD) analyses were performed to determine the phase fraction and equilibrium grain shape and size. Bulk XRD was performed on a Scintag XDS2000 (Scintag, Franklin, MA) di.ractometer and the EBSD analysis was performed on a Zeiss Supra 40 FEG (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) scanning electron microscope (SEM) with EDAX OIM (EDAX, Draper, UT) analysis software. 
Fatigue testing was conducted on an MTS servo-hydraulic testing frame (MTS, Eden Prairie, MN) with a 100 kN capacity. For each spe-cimen type, a set of four fully reversed (R = .1) stress amplitudes were selected to provide low-cycle fatigue (LCF), intermediate-cycle fatigue, and high-cycle fatigue (HCF) lives. Before testing, the cross-sectional area was initially measured with calipers to select an appropriate loading force for the desired nominal stress amplitude, 考a. These initial measurements did not provide an adequate description of the load-bearing cross-sectional area due to the high surface roughness. Upon failure, fracture surfaces were removed and prepared for analytical fractography, which was conducted on a Zeiss Supra 40 FEG SEM. In addition to fractography, the fracture surfaces were measured using digital imaging and ImageJ software to give a more accurate mea-surement of the load-bearing cross-sectional area. Fig. 4 
gives a re-presentation of the initial caliper measured cross-section in red1 and the more representative load-bearing cross-sectional area in blue1, which was then used to calculate a more representative applied stress ampli-tude for the stress-life curves. 
RESULT
3. Experimental results 

3.1. Microstructure 
The general microstructure of the AM Ti-6Al-4V parts consisted of semi-columnar prior 汕 grains with the major axis parallel to the build direction. The columnar microstructure had abrupt changes in the prior 汕 grain orientation resulting in the broken columnar microstructure observed. A scaled representation of the microstructure is given in the zoomed in area of Fig. 
5. As can be seen, the major axis of the prior 汕 grains are oriented at an angle of 45∼ from the loading direction, in a broken epitaxial manner along the build direction. The prior 汕 grains have abrupt interruptions in the epitaxial growth which results in new grains with di.erent orientations, referred to as stray grains by the welding community [28每30]. Anderson and Dupont [29] 
concluded that, during the welding process of a Ni-based super alloy, stray grain formation increases with increasing travel speed and power, which is related to the high thermal gradient. The L-PBF process inherently re-sults in large thermal gradients due to the extremely high cooling rates contributing to the stray columnar prior 汕 grain structure. 
In addition to optical microscopy, EBSD and XRD were conducted to better analyze the microstructure. The results show a fully martensitic microstructure as indicated by the phase map, acicular grain structure, and absence of the equilibrium 汕 phase, as detailed in Fig. 6(b). In general, most wrought Ti-6Al-4V alloys have an equilibrium 汐 + 汕 phase in which the 汐 phase grows from the 汕 phase upon relatively slow cooling during thermal treatment. The absence of the equilibrium 汕 phase indicates that there was not enough time during cooling in L-PBF process to allow the 汐 phase to di.use from the 汕 phase, and thus, the di.usionless 汕 ↙ 汐∩ martensitic phase transformation occurred [31,32]. The 汐∩ grain size was measured using the EBSD data and OIM software giving an average width of 1.5 米m with an average aspect ratio of 0.55. The inverse pole .gure map, in Fig. 6(a), con.rms that most grains are acicular, which is commonly related to the martensitic phase in tita-nium alloys. 


3.2. Fatigue behavior 
The stress-life fatigue behavior of wrought Ti-6Al-4V has been well studied and shown to have a fatigue limit in the range of 550每750 MPa [33]. The stress-life curves for both CGV and CGD specimens with the appropriate stress amplitudes based on the load-bearing cross-sectional area are given in Fig. 7(a) and (b), respectively. The data is plotted on a semi-log scale to give a more consistent representation of the variation between data points that would diminish on a log每log plot due to the low stress amplitude range (75每450 MPa) tested. The fatigue limit for these specimens falls between 75 and 120 MPa which is in stark con-trast to the ranges observed for wrought Ti-6Al-4V alloys (550每750 MPa). The reduced fatigue limit is likely due to the high surface roughness, which results in many prime crack nucleation sites at the e.ective notch-like areas along the rough surface highlighted in red1 in Fig. 4. Additionally, the martensitic microstructure has also been shown to have a detrimental e.ect on the fatigue behavior of ti-tanium alloys [34]. A combination of these two e.ects can result in the drastic reduction of the fatigue limit for L-PBF produced Ti-6Al-4V parts in the as-built condition. 
The stress-life fatigue behavior of CGV specimens is presented in Fig. 7(a), in which the hollow symbols indicate tests that reached failure, while the solid symbols indicate tests that did not fail before 107 cycles. The stress-life data shows a slight increase in fatigue life for Geometry 1 which had the smallest surface area; however, Geometries 2 and 3 exhibited similar fatigue lives for nominal stress amplitudes larger than 100 MPa. Furthermore, the nominal stress amplitude of 100 MPa resulted in fatigue lives longer than 107 cycles for specimens in Geometries 1 and 2, while Geometry 3 required a reduction to 75 MPa to achieve a fatigue life longer than 107 cycles. These results indicate that the di.erence in fatigue behavior across all geometries may be related to other factors besides surface area, as was described by Pegues et al. [35]. 
The .nal two specimen sets, CGD Geometries 4 and 5, were de-signed to evaluate any size e.ects as a result of the decreasing cross-sectional diameter in CGV specimens. The diameters of these CGD specimens (Geometries 4 and 5) were held constant while the gage length was increased from 9.75 mm in Geometry 4 to 12.00 mm in Geometry 5 producing an increased surface area of 25%. Therefore, the CGD geometries have di.erent surface areas and similar diameters to determine if the di.erences in fatigue behavior between Geometry 1每3 were related to surface area or cross-sectional diameter. The CGD stress-life fatigue data set was generated in a similar fashion to the CGV specimens and is plotted in Fig. 
7(b). The stress-life behavior of Geo-metries 4 and 5 were similar to Geometry 3 in which a stress amplitude of 75 MPa was required to obtain a runout past 107 cycles. There was an unexpected large amount of scatter for Geometry 4 compared to the other geometries for stress amplitudes around 100 MPa. Interestingly, the Geometry 4 specimen exhibiting the longest fatigue life had slightly lower 考a, as determined by the load-bearing cross-section, compared to the other two specimens at this nominal stress amplitude. 
Fig. 8 presents the comparison of all fatigue data along with the stress-life fatigue curves, determined by Basquin＊s equation [36]. The fatigue behavior is similar between geometries 2每5 except for the high cycle fatigue tests (考a ≒ 100 MPa) in which there is a signi.cant amount of scatter among the specimens. Geometries 1 and 2 both had fatigue limits at a nominal stress amplitude of 100 MPa while all other geometries resulted in failure at this stress level. As the stress amplitude approaches 200 MPa, however, the data sets between Geometries 2每5in Fig. 8(a) show consistent overlap. Comparing the stress-life curves in Fig. 8(b), there is an observable shift in fatigue life for Geometry 1 while Geometries 2每5 all show overlap amongst each other. The in-consistent amount of scatter in the HCF regime cannot be adequately explained without further investigation into the fracture surfaces. 


3.3. Fractography 
Fractography was performed on select specimens to investigate potential diffferences in failure mechanisms between sample geometries. Specifically, the failure mechanisms of Geometries 2每5 were in-vestigated to determine the source of variability observed in the HCF regime. All specimens had cracks originate at the surface and, more importantly, along the down-skin surface. Fig. 9 shows a representation of the typical fracture surface showing three distinct crack growth zones. The crack growth zones included the initial stable crack growth stage (1, shown in blue1), a quasi-stable crack growth stage (2, shown in red1), and a .nal unstable crack growth stage (3, shown in white1). 
The .rst stage of crack growth includes the crack nucleation and the subsequent stable crack growth. Further investigation revealed that cracks initiated at sharp micro-notches where partially melted powder particles were attached to the specimen surface. A representative crack initiation site is detailed in Fig. 10(a), where the arrows point out two micro-notches at the intersection of partially melted powder particles. As the crack continues to develop in the microstructurally short crack growth stage, crack propagation appears to be a mixture of transgra-nular crack growth across the martensitic 汐∩ grains highlighted in red1 in Fig. 10(a) as well as 汐∩ intergranular crack growth as a result of the .ne acicular 汐∩ grains. In this stage, many cracks initiate on the surface as shown by the blue arrows in Fig. 10(b). Each crack grows in-dependently on a separate plane until they begin to interact with each other and eventually coalesce into a single crack. Once the cracks coalesce to form a large crack, very distinct tear ridges are left behind from the merging cracks on di.erent planes. These tear ridges are in-dicated in Fig.10(b) by the white arrows and extend into the interior of the facture surface in the direction of crack growth. The second stage of crack growth typically occurred immediately after crack coalescence. Once the cracks coalesce into a single large crack, the driving force increases and the stability of the crack growth begins to deteriorate. This crack growth stage consisted of a combina-tion of cyclic and static failure modes resulting in a more tortuous crack path than the .rst crack growth stage. Fig. 11 details a portion of this crack growth stage in which stable fatigue striations, highlighted in blue1, can be seen next to an area that is characterized by ductile tearing across a plane, highlighted in red. There are some secondary cracks that can be seen around this grain, shown by arrows, indicating a mixture of 汐∩ transgranular and prior 汕 intergranular crack growth. As the crack continued to develop in the second stage, the stability of the crack front decreased until it resulted in the .nal unstable crack growth stage. 
1 For interpretation of color in Figs. 4, 9, 10, 11 and 14, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. 

The .nal crack growth stage is characterized by highly unstable crack growth and final rupture of the specimen. Fig. 12 details re-presentative characteristics that occur during this .nal stage. Fig. 12(a) presents an area where the end of a large prior 汕 grain was pulled entirely from the opposite fracture surface indicating a continuing shift to intergranular failure along prior 汕 grains that was .rst observed in the second stage. Secondary cracking and cleavage facets were also observed in this region, as shown in Fig. 12(a). This combination of prior 汕 intergranular failure, cleavage, secondary cracking, and ductile tearing creates an even more tortuous fracture surface than the second crack growth stage. The stability of the crack eventually deteriorated such that .nal rupture occurred causing a small shear lip at the edge of the specimen. This ductile tearing in shear mode is indicated by the equiaxed dimples shown in Fig. 12(b). 
DISCUSSION
4. Discussion 
The initial CGV fatigue results indicated a possible e.ect of surface area on the stress-life for AM specimens in the as-built condition. The fracture surfaces, however, showed a di.erent mechanism behind the shorter fatigue lives of specimens with larger surface area. Speci.cally, the number of initiation sites and their proximity to each other appear to have an e.ect on the fatigue lives among the di.erent geometries. Fig. 13 presents representative fracture surfaces of Geometries 1每3in order of decreasing diameter, (a) being the largest diameter (smallest surface area) and (c) being the smallest diameter (largest surface area). It is worth reminding here that to increase the surface area while holding the volume of the gage section constant, the diameter of the specimen needed to be decreased (see Fig. 
1). Fig. 13 shows that as the diameter of the gage section decreases, the number of initiation sites increases while the distance between the initiation sites decreases. The closer the initiation sites are to each other, the faster the respective cracks begin to interact with each other, eventually coalescing into a single large crack with more driving force. For Geometry 1 (Fig. 13(a)) there is only a single distinct tear ridge with two initiation sites, shown with arrows, relatively far from each other. Comparing this to Fig. 13(b) for Geometry 2, there is still just a single distinct tear ridge, however, the two initiation sites are slightly closer to each other. Finally, Fig. 13(c) for Geometry 3 shows at least four distinct tear ridges with more initiation sites that are even closer in proximity to each other than the Geometry 2 specimen in Fig. 13(b). Additionally, the tear ridges in Fig. 13(c) appear larger in depth resulting in a much more torturous fracture surface in the .rst crack growth stage than in Fig. 13(a) and (b). These observations explain the nearly perfect correlation of the fatigue data for Geometries 4 and 5. For specimens with similar dia-meter, the fatigue lives are mostly consistent for all stress levels, re-gardless of surface area, indicating that the diameter may be more in-.uential to the fatigue behavior than surface area. 
There were also observable di.erences in the crack growth zone of the fracture surfaces between the di.erent geometries. Fig. 14(a) gives a representation of the largest diameter/smallest surface area specimen (Geometry 1) and Fig. 14(b) represents the smallest diameter/largest surface area specimen (Geometry 3), both at a nominal stress amplitude of 300 MPa. In both specimens, the stability of the crack begins to de-teriorate soon after the cracks begin to coalesce which occurs near the end of the tear ridges. The blue stable crack growth zone in Fig. 14(a) is relatively large compared to the total fracture surface area and is ob-servably di.erent than the smaller diameter specimen in Fig. 14(b). The smaller diameter specimen (Fig. 14(b)), on the other hand, has a much smaller ratio of stable crack growth zone (blue) compared to the total fracture surface. Both geometries result in main and secondary cracks that coalesce and transition into the second quasi-stable crack growth zone, however, the size of the stable crack growth zone is smaller than for the smaller diameter specimen. For the smaller diameter specimens, the main and secondary cracks initiate much closer to one another, and therefore, they coalesce and become less stable quicker than the larger diameter specimens. 
The quasi-stable crack growth zone (red) shows somewhat similar behavior for both specimens, beginning at the tear ridge left behind from the two merging cracks and increases in tortuosity up until the unstable crack growth region. The unstable crack growth zone (white), however, is strikingly di.erent between the two specimens. While the crack path in the unstable region appears to be much more tortuous for the smaller diameter specimen, the most notable di.erence is the ratio between the unstable crack growth area and fracture surface area. The smaller specimen has a much larger ratio of unstable crack growth as compared to the larger specimen, indicating that the stability of the crack deteriorates much more quickly for smaller diameter specimens. These results indicate that the diameter of the specimen may a.ect the crack growth behavior as well as the initiation behavior for a given geometry further con.rming that the specimen diameter may have more detrimental e.ects on the fatigue behavior of AM parts than the surface area, which again explains the observations in Figs. 7 and 8. Specimens built at some angle from the vertical direction generally have higher surface roughness on their down-skin surfaces compared to the up-skin surfaces [20,21]. The di.erence in surface roughness may be related to a di.erence in the solidi.ed part volume below the re-spective layer edges which can a.ect the thermal history [21]. It should be noted that the solidi.ed part has signi.cantly higher thermal con-ductivity than the powder bed meaning the majority of heat will be dissipated through the part. This e.ect is visually shown in Fig. 2, where there is more solidi.ed part volume beneath the layer along the up-skin edge to dissipate heat. Conversely, on the down-skin edge, much less solidi.ed part volume exists to dissipate heat, resulting in the layer edge remaining hotter for a longer period of time. The prolonged increased temperature/time can result in additional partially melted powders adhering to the surface which causes the down-skin surface to have a rougher surface [21]. 

Numerical simulations conducted using the model developed by Masoomi et al. [37] 
showed the temperature on the down-skin edge remained above the melting point of Ti-6Al-4V (1604 ∼C) for approxi-mately 0.42 ms. In contrast, the up-skin edge only remains above the melting point for 0.17 ms. These observations and simulation results indicate that the higher roughness on the down-skin surface compared to the up-skin surface is a result of the down-skin edge having less so-lidi.ed part volume underneath to dissipate the supplied heat. 
Additionally, the simulation results indicate that this e.ect can be somewhat alleviated by increasing the part diameter. The increased solidi.ed part volume below the down-skin edge can dissipate the heat more e.ciently which would be evident in the surface roughness measurements amongst the geometries. Parts with su.ciently large diameters should have lower down-skin surface roughness compared to smaller diameter parts. 
Table 1 lists the mean surface roughness values, Ra, obtained for each geometry along with the standard deviations. The results indicate that the roughness for the up-skin surfaces is mostly similar for all geometries ranging from approximately 12每15 米m. The mean down-skin surface roughness, however, shows consistency between Geome-tries 2每5 while Geometry 1 has a surface roughness more comparable to the up-skin surface. In fact, the mean surface roughness is slightly higher for the up-skin surface while the standard deviation for the down-skin roughness is higher. Observation of the down-skin and up-skin surfaces for Geometry 1 also indicates that there are more partially fused powder particles on the down-skin surface, which is believed to a.ect the geometry of the micro-notches introduced by the intersecting particles. The sharpness of the micro-notches of intersecting powder particles as shown in Fig. 10(a) increases the likelihood of crack 
Table 1 
Average roughness and gage diameter measurements for as built geometries considered in this study. 
initiation occurring on the down-skin surface, even if the surface roughness is similar to the up-skin surface. Increasing roughness values on the down-skin surface, however, proves to be even more detrimental to the fatigue resistance as indicated by the stress-life curves for Geo-metries 2每5 as compared to Geometry 1 in Fig. 8(b). 
An ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey analysis of the surface roughness data showed a signi.cant di.erence between the down-skin and up-skin surfaces for Geometries 2每5. Similar up-skin roughness values were shown for all geometries, but only Geometry 1 had a similar down-skin roughness compared to the up-skin roughness (Table 1). Geometries 2每5 exhibited signi.cantly di.erent surface roughness values between the up-and down-skin surfaces. This .nding validated the previously described thermal simulation results for larger diameter sections. These results are visually presented in the box plot in Fig. 15 showing the spread of the Ra measurements for each specimen geometry and a re-latively larger diameter (9.5 mm) obtained from the grip section of an untested specimen. The boxes for each surface indicate the interquartile range of the surface roughness measurements, such that they can be a visual indication of statistical di.erence between two data sets. From this analysis the larger grip diameter was similar to Geometry 1 in which the down-skin surface roughness was statistically similar to the up-skin surface roughness while the up-skin and down-skin surfaces for Geometries 2每5 were mostly statistically di.erent. Geometry 3 does show some overlap between the up-skin and down-skin measurements, however, the trend of the large di.erences in the roughness between each surface is still apparent. Additionally, the box plot indicates that diameters above 4.90 mm begin to have down-skin surface roughness more similar to the up-skin surface which is most likely related to the lower amount of time spent above the melting temperature for larger diameter parts. 
The statistical surface roughness analysis explained some key dif-ferences in the low cycle fatigue behavior (nominal 考a ≡ 200 MPa) for the given geometries tested. Geometry 1, which has the smallest surface area and coincidentally the largest gage diameter, showed better fatigue performance as compared to Geometries 2每5, as previously shown in Figs. 7 and 8. Therefore, the lower number of crack initiation sites observed for Geometry 1 specimens with larger gage diameter, can most likely can be explained by the decreased di.erence in surface roughness between the up-skin and down-skin surfaces of the specimen. Geometries 2每5, on the other hand, had similar roughness values on their down-skin portions which explains the similar low-cycle fatigue behavior observed amongst these geometries. 
The increased surface roughness on the down-skin surfaces for Geometries 2每5, compared to Geometry 1, was attributed to an in-creased number of partially fused powder particles on the down-skin surfaces, resulting in lower fatigue resistance. As previously discussed, a combination of partially fused powder particles on the surfaces may create a series of sharp micro-notches across these surfaces. The in-creased number of micro-notches created on the down-skin surfaces, as compared to the up-skin surfaces, is believed to be the reason for the decreases shown in fatigue life. Essentially, sharp micro-notches will initiate cracks earlier or in greater quantities for surfaces that have a higher surface roughness (i.e. Geometries 2每5). In this case, this in-creased surface roughness for Geometries 2每5 is related to the smaller diameter specimens and is attributed to the amount of time the layer edge remains above the melting point. 
Interestingly, while the low cycle fatigue behavior can be explained well by the surface roughness, the scatter and reduced fatigue strength in the high cycle regime (nominal 考a ≒ 100 MPa) were not addressed. From Fig. 8(a) it appears that AM parts in the high cycle regime are more sensitive to diameter. Geometries 2每5 all have similar roughness values and, by the previous argument, should therefore have similar fatigue lives, if only the surface roughness is considered. Considering the fact that the initial cross-sectional measurements may not give the actual representation of the load-bearing cross-section, the e.ect of the gage diameter can be easily understood in regards to the surface roughness. As the specimen＊s diameter decreases, the di.erence be-tween the load-bearing cross-section and the initial measured cross-section becomes larger. The di.erence in load-bearing cross-section and initial measured cross-section was previously shown on a fracture sur-face in Fig. 
4. This over-estimation of the cross-section results in in-creasingly higher applied stress amplitudes (as compared to the nom-inal 100 MPa fatigue limit) which yields fatigue failure before 107 cycles. Fig. 16 presents fatigue lives for tests that had an initial esti-mated (nominal) stress amplitude of 100 MPa based on the initial measured diameter using a caliper. The hollow data points in this .gure represent failed specimens and the .lled data point was a runout test. As the applied stress amplitudes approach 110 MPa, a sharp bend in the stress life data occurs resulting in the large scatter observed in the high cycle fatigue regime. Essentially a fatigue limit of approximately 110 MPa exists above which failure typically occurs before 107 cycles. Geometries with smaller cross-sectional diameters are more a.ected by the higher surface roughness resulting in an applied stress amplitude that is considerably higher than the preset nominal stress amplitude of 100 MPa. These results explain the scatter observed for the HCF data showing surface roughness can be more detrimental to smaller diameter specimens where the over-estimation of the cross-sectional area results in a greater applied stress. 
The fatigue behavior of AM Ti-6Al-4V specimens fabricated diag-onally were mostly a.ected by the down-skin surface roughness. For geometries with cross-sectional diameters larger than 4.90 mm, the down-skin surface roughness was more comparable to the up-skin surface roughness, resulting in an improved fatigue performance at all stress levels. Furthermore, smaller cross-sectional diameter specimens were more in.uenced by the surface roughness in the HCF regime re-sulting in higher applied stresses and lower fatigue lives. The fatigue behavior of the di.erent geometries was also shown to be a.ected by the crack growth and crack coalescence characteristics. Larger diameter specimens had larger portions of stable crack growth as multiple crack initiation sites were further apart requiring more fatigue cycles before crack coalescence occurred. The smaller diameter specimens, on the other hand, had crack coalescence occurring earlier due to the close proximity of the crack imitation sites. 
CONCLUSION
5. Conclusions 
The effects of surface area, surface roughness, and gage diameter on the fatigue behavior of as-built L-PBF Ti-6Al-4V parts fabricated at 45∼ 
(i.e. diagonal direction) were investigated in this study. Through sev-eral experimental observations and measurements of the micro-structure, surface characteristics, fatigue behavior, and fracture sur-faces, the following conclusions can be made: 
1. Initial results indicated that surface area may a.ect the fatigue re-sistance of the varying geometries. However, when the applied stress was corrected by only considering the load-bearing cross-section, no signi.cant e.ect of increasing surface area on the fatigue behavior was observed for the as-built additive manufactured spe-cimens within the diameter range examined in this study. 
2. The crack initiation behavior was found to be highly sensitive to surface roughness, where all cracks initiated on the rougher down-skin surface. Specimens with lower down-skin surface roughness showed a superior fatigue resistance as compared to specimens with higher down-skin surface roughness. This result is important for parts that are built diagonally or with overhangs as the higher down-skin surface roughness will be more susceptible to crack in-itiation causing a lower fatigue resistance. 
3. The crack growth behavior was shown to be a.ected by the cross-sectional diameter with smaller diameter parts having multiple crack initiation sites closer to each other. The proximity of the multiple cracks results in much earlier crack coalescence which deteriorates the crack growth stability resulting in a lower fatigue life. 
4. A gage diameter larger than 4.90 mm resulted in significantly lower surface roughness for down-skin surfaces due to the larger solidi.ed part volume beneath the layer edge, thus dissipating the supplied heat more e.ciently. This result indicates that the e.ect of the high down-skin surface roughness can be minimized by increasing the part thickness/size at diagonally built surfaces. 
5. Thee.ect of surface roughness on the high cycle fatigue behavior was found to be greater for specimens with smaller gage diameters. Similar surface roughness on decreasing gage diameters resulted in an increasing overestimation of the load-bearing cross-section. Therefore, the applied stress was higher and yielded shorter fatigue lives in the high cycle fatigue regime. 
The fatigue limit of the as-built additive manufactured Ti-6Al-4V 
specimens was approximately 110 MPa which is signi.cantly lower than the 550每750 MPa range for wrought Ti-6Al-4V. The surface roughness, introducing many micro-notches along the surface, most likely has signi.cant contribution to the reduced fatigue strength of additive manufactured Ti-6Al-4V specimens. 
These results highlight the importance of understanding the spe-cimen property to part performance relationships of AM parts subjected to cyclic loading. Fatigue data is typically generated in the laboratory on standard size specimens with uniform gage sections, while the in-service parts can have di.erent size, geometry, layer orientation, sur-face roughness, and more. Not only can a structural part experience very di.erent thermal history than the standard specimen, but the thermal history may even vary from point to point of a part depending of its geometry complexity. Any variations in thermal history can a.ect the resulting microstructure, porosity level and surface roughness, which in turn will a.ect the part performance. This raises serious concerns regarding applicability of mechanical properties generated in the laboratory from standard size specimens to design and evaluate load-bearing structures and components. Therefore, there is a critical need to better understand the specimen property to part performance relationships as well as to develop appropriate standards speci.cto additive manufacturing technology and challenges. 
Acknowledgement 
Partial funding for this work was provided by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1657195. Supports from the Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) is also greatly appreciated. Authors also acknowledge the support of Mohammad Masoomi from Auburn University for performing all the simulations of this study. 








1. Introduction 
Inrecenttimes,XCThasbeenwidelyusedforqualitativeandquan-titativeassessmentsinthe.eldsofaerospace,automotive,defense,and medicalapplications[1每3].Inparticular,theuseofXCTfornon-destructiveinspectioninaerospacecompositeshasincreasedconsider-ably[4,5].Thisisduetoitshighspatialresolutionandtheabilitytopre-ciselycapturethemultiscalestructurenon-destructively[6].XCT providesinformationontheinternalcompositestructureinboth2D and3Dformats.ThisisoneofthemainadvantagesofusingXCTcom-paredtootherdestructiveand2Dvisualizationtechniques,suchas scanningelectronmicroscopy,opticalmicroscopy,etc.,[7].Moreover, othernon-destructivetechniques,suchasultrasonicC-scanandinfra-redthermography,cannotcapturethehigh-resolutiondamagemecha-nismsthatcanbedetectedusingXCT[8]. 
ThedevelopmentofXCTforobserving.ber-reinforcedpolymer (FRP)compositesiscrucial.ThisisbecauseFRPcompositesareaniso-tropicandheterogeneous,sincethepropertiesofindividualconstitu-entsaredifferent,andthedeformationbehavioroftheseisdirection dependent[9].TheaccumulationofdefectsinFRPcompositestakes theformofcomplex3Dpatterns.Therefore,investigatingmicrostruc-turalchangesinFRPcompositesduringmanufacturingandunderload-ingscenariorepresentativeofin-serviceconditionsisdif.cult. Furthermore,thereisatendencyfortheformationofprocess-induced defectsduringthemanufactureofFRPcomposites,particularlywhen manufacturingcomplexgeometries[10].These.awscanbeinthe formoffabricwrinkles,resinpockets,inter-andintra-towvoids,matrix microcracks,delaminationanddebonding,etc.,[11,12].Manyofthese defectsarebarelyvisibleorinvisibletothenakedeye[13].Asaconse-quence,themechanicalperformanceofcompositecomponentsmay besigni.cantlyreduced.Hence,obtaininginformationduringthe 
differentstagesofmanufacturingandpost-processingofcomposites usingXCTisinvaluable[3,14,15].TheinformationobtainedfromXCT imagescanbeusedtocreategeometricalmodelsoffabricsandprepregs forperformingnumericalsimulations[16].Thereareseveralnumerical simulationtoolsavailable,suchasGeodict,Avizo,Voxtex,etc.,topredict processparametersfromthecreatedgeometricalmodelsoftherein-forcements[17每19].Inthisway,theXCTcanbevaluableforunder-standingandimprovingthemanufacturingprocess. 
Inrecenttimes,FRPcompositeshavebeenwidelyused,notonlyin primaryandsecondarystructuralaircraftapplications,butalsoinen-ginenacellesandcowlings,duetotheirhighstrengthtoweightratio comparedtometals[20每22].TheAirbusA350,Boeing787and,Bombar-dierC-SeriesaircraftarefabricatedwithFRPcompositeshavingN53%, 50%,and47%ofcompositesbyweight,respectively[23每25].Itisclear fromFig.1thatallofthecompositecomponentsintheAirbusA380in-volvetheuseofadvancedcompositemanufacturingtechniques,suchas autoclave,resintransfermolding(RTM),resininfusion(RI),resin.lm infusion(RFI),automated.berplacement(AFP)andautomatedtape laying(ATL)[26每28].Also,inrecenttimes,AFPandATLtechniques havebeenwidelyusedtomanufacturethewingstructureoftheMS-21aircraftasanalternativetousinghand-laidprepregs[29,30].More-over,mostunmannedaerialvehicles(UAVs)anddronesarecurrently beingfabricatedusingFRPcomposites[31,32].Thisincreaseduseof compositesisduetoadvancesincompositesmanufacturingtechniques, enablingcomplexshapedstructuralcomponentstobefabricatedeasily andrapidly. 
Inthisreview,wefocusprimarilyontheuseofXCTincommonly-usedaerospacemanufacturingtechniques(i)OoAprocessing,suchas VacuumBagOnly(VBO)andLiquidCompositeMolding(LCM),and (ii)theautoclaveprocessing.TheOoAtechniquesrequirelowcapitalin-vestmentsandprovide.exibilityindesignandsize[35].However, 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
Rudder  
Vertical Tail Plane  (ATL/Autoclave)  
(ATL/Autoclave)  Radome  
Glare (Autoclave)  (RFI/RTM)  
Flaps  
(ATL/Autoclave)  
Stringers  
Horizontal Tail  (ATL/Autoclave)  
Plane  
(ATL/Autoclave)  
Engine Cowlings  
(AFP/Autoclave)  
Rear pressure bulkhead (RFI/RTM)  Tail cone  Ailerons (ATL/Autoclave)  
Fig. 1. Airbus A380 aircraft components produced using advanced composite manufacturing techniques [26]. 
there are issues of the void generation that are directly associated with low-pressure processing. In contrast, the autoclave process enables original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to fabricate components with a low void content (b2%) by applying suf.cient pressure and tem-perature to the laminate during consolidation. However, there are size limitations, and capital investment and maintenance costs associated with this process are also high. [36,37]. 
There are some challenges in achieving high-quality parts using liq-uid composite molding (LCM) techniques. The .ow through the dual scale porous media (dry reinforcement) is often challenging [38,39]. As a result, complete saturation of the reinforcement is vital in conven-tional LCM techniques. Incomplete saturation may lead to dry spots and high void content in the part [40,41]. However, complete saturation with a low void content can be achieved by further enhancing LCM tech-niques [42每47], through the use of advanced processing and character-ization techniques [48每50], and enhancing the permeability of .ber preforms using .ber surface treatment and ultraviolet (UV) curable resin [51], leading to successful injection with low void content. In such processes, the visualization of microstructural variations in the .ber preform at different stages of resin infusion (before, during or after) is a challenging task. 
OoA prepreg possessing offers good control over .ber alignment and enables the use of high viscosity toughened resins. However, thermoset prepregs have a low shelf-life, therefore, the protection of thermoset prepregs against environmental conditions in accordance with the manufacturer's data sheet is important. On the other hand, thermoplas-tic prepregs offer a range of bene.ts over thermoset prepregs, such as recyclability, room temperature storage, long shelf-life, weldability, high fracture toughness, fast production rate, good chemical resistance, etc., [52]. Nevertheless, the melting temperatures and viscosity of typi-cal thermoplastic prepregs are comparatively high, requiring high pres-sures and temperatures for consolidation [53,54]. On the other hand, resin movement cannot be tracked during laminate consolidation in au-toclave and VBO prepreg curing techniques. 
The issues mentioned above and the challenges associated with aerospace composite manufacturing techniques can be resolved through the use of in-situ XCT techniques [55,56]. Recently, the use of in-situ XCT for studying the LCM process parameters at every stage of the manufacturing cycle (before, during, and after resin infusion) has in-creased 
[57每59]. Further, the data is used to develop XCT-based numer-ical models for studying the OoA and autoclave process parameters, which can potentially reduce characterization time, cost, and the associ-ated number of experiments. The literature related to composites manufacturing using OoA (LCM and VBO curing) and autoclave, partic-ularly process modeling approaches using XCT are limited. Some recent studies have discussed void generation in FRP composites [60], and in prepregs 
during 
OoA 
processing 
[61]. However, it is important to inves-tigate further the fabricating quality using XCT imaging for faster pro-cess characterization with lower costs. 
In this review, XCT-based modeling approaches are discussed for the complete understanding of the OoA and autoclave manufactur-ing processes, and the associated challenges during the different stages of manufacturing. The procedure to optimize the process pa-rameters via numerical modeling is given for minimizing the number of experiments. The scope of this article is shown in Fig. 
2 
with the aim of reviewing the effect of various process conditions on key pro-cessing parameters in OoA and autoclave manufacturing processes. In the .rst section, we discuss the working principle, advantages, and challenges associated with the XCT procedure. The signi.cance of synchrotron and laboratory-based XCT for time-lapse studies to generate numerical models for reducing the processing time and cost is discussed. In the second section, XCT data-driven model gen-eration techniques are discussed. In the third and fourth sections, the application of XCT in understanding and improving the OoA and au-toclave manufacturing processes are reviewed. The role of XCT in characterizing the compaction behavior, resin permeability through reinforcing fabric, the air permeability of prepregs, and void forma-tion and removal are discussed. Finally, we highlight the potential areas in different composites manufacturing processes, where ex-situ and in-situ XCT techniques could be useful in better understand-ingand improvingthe process. 
2. X-ray computed tomography of FRP composites 
2.1. Working principle and data processing 
The XCT technique is commonly used as a non-destructive evalu-ation (NDE) tool. A laboratory-scale XCT usually consists of an X-ray source that converts electrical input power to X-rays, a rotary stage where the specimen is mounted, and a detector, as shown in Fig. 
3 
(a, b). The resolution achieved with XCT is relatively high compared to other NDE techniques (e.g., ultrasonic C scan), due to its high 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
OoA 
Prepreg Hand layup 
. Prepreg Air 
XCT 
Permeability 
. Fabric Compaction . Fabric Permeability Machine . Prepreg Compaction 
. Degree of Impregnation . Resin Flow Patterns . Porosity . Void characterization 
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the aerospace manufacturing techniques and the potential role of XCT in characterization of the process parameters. 
frequency [62,63]. The XCT principle is based on generating 2D ra-receives a large number of radiographic (projection) images at dif-diographs by impinging a beam of X-rays from the X-ray tube ferent angular positions during a 360∼ rotation of the sample. After through a sample. Further, a CCD (Charge Coupled Device) detector that, these XCT scanned images are reconstructed using 
(a) X-ray beam (b) 
Specimen X-ray tube 
X-ray tube focal spot 
Detector 
Specimen 
X-ray tube 
Rotary stage 
Lx Ly 
(c) 
Fig. 3. (a) A typical laboratory XCT setup, (b) schematic representation of the setup and (c) stepwise XCT data analysis procedure. 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
reconstruction algorithms (matrix inversion, .ltered back-projection algorithm, etc.) and software such as CT Pro [64], Phoenix datos|x [2], NRecon, Octopus Reconstruction, etc. A .ltered back-projection algorithm is a commonly-used procedure [4,65]. The .eld of view is initially cropped to reduce the size of the .le for re-construction. The reconstruction methods for XCT are reported in detail elsewhere [66]. 
2.1.1. Voxel geometry creation and data analysis procedure 
The procedure to generate the voxel geometry for running simula-tions to study various composite process parameters is shown in Fig. 
(c). The overall XCT data analysis procedure can be divided into three fundamental steps: (i) pre-processing, which includes .ltering and smoothing of the XCT data to enrich image quality. These reconstructed XCT images are then used as input data to create a 3D structure using software packages such as, VGStudio Max, Geodict, Fiji, VoxTex, Avizo, etc., (ii) Analysis, which includes the segmentation and feature extrac-tion (component analysis), etc. The segmentation procedure is the es-sential step in data analysis that distinguishes the different constituents in FRP composites, such as the .bers, resin, air, etc., based on their greyscale values. The .ber orientations in unidirectional, woven, and 3D fabrics such as warp, weft, and Z-binder yarns can be ob-tained from the segmentation method. After segmentation, the model can run in Abaqus, Ansys, LS-Dyna, etc., to predict the compaction re-sponse of the fabric numerically. The permeability simulation can run in .ow modeling software packages, such as Fluent, Geodict, Ansys/ CFX, etc., based on computational .uid dynamic (CFD) techniques [67], and the mold .lling, dry spot prediction, and cure simulation can run in Liquid Injection Molding Simulation (LIMS), PAM RTM and Con-vergent Compro software [68]. 
(iii) Visualization of data, which includes mapping and rendering of the results and then verifying the results with reference methods [6]. Further details related to the XCT data analysis process are reported elsewhere [69]. 
2.1.2. In.uence of process parameters on XCT image quality 
The XCT image quality can be reduced due to issues such as artifacts, noise, and image blur. Some of the common types of artifacts are beam drift, beam hardening, ring, and partial volume artifacts. Beam drift can be caused by the thermal expansion of the X-ray tube. Beam hardening can be caused due to the mismatch in real and assumed X-ray attenua-tion coef.cients of the material, which results in streak and cupping ar-tifacts [70]. These issues can be overcome through the use of pre and post-processing 
techniques 
and 
the 
dual-energy 
method 
[71]. Ring arti-facts may occur due to the mechanical misalignment between the X-ray source and the detector or the low sensitivity of the detector. Partial vol-ume artifacts are due to the limited .eld of view, i.e., only part of the specimen is projected. Noise is mainly induced by photon noise, whereas image blur is associated with geometric or motion blurring ef-fects [72]. Realistic XCT projections without any artifacts, noise, and image blurring can be obtained by using the SimCT software package [73]. SimCT is an X-ray imaging simulation tool which enhances the image quality by optimizing the scan parameters automatically [74]. 
Image resolution and contrast have to be optimized for obtaining high-quality images of FRP composites. In order to do that, the XCT pa-rameters, such as X-ray voltage and current, spatial resolution, image acquisition time, rotation steps, .lters, etc. need to be studied [75]. 
(a) Voltage and current 
X-ray characteristics can be controlled by the applied voltage and current to the X-ray tubes. The wavelength of the X-rays emitted can be reduced by increasing the voltage, while the X-ray intensity can be increased 
by 
increasing 
the 
current 
at 
a 
constant 
voltage 
[76]. 
(b) Spatial resolution 
The ability to show .ne structural details or the least separation at which two points are distinguished in a scanned image is de.ned as the spatial resolution. It depends on several factors, such as the perfor-mance of the X-ray tube and its focal spot size, detector characteristics (sensitivity, dynamic range, noise, quantum ef.ciency, etc.), capacity of the computer, data enhancement techniques, etc. The nano-sized focal tube is used for lighter samples, owing to its smaller spot size, while the micro-sized focal tube is used for highly absorbing materials, where the same voltage and .lament current are used. The exposure time can be adjusted from 33 milliseconds to 5 s in the former case to obtain a good spatial resolution by obtaining a high signal to noise ratio [77]. However, the tube power cannot increase, due to the smaller focal size of the nano-sized tube. The spatial resolution can be measured using either the Rayleigh or the Sparrow criteria [78,79]. 
(c) Acquisition time and rotation steps 
In general, a higher image acquisition time (scan time) gives high contrast images, which vary for each XCT system. Some scanners use a stepwise scanning approach, while some use a continuous scanning ap-proach, which includes continuous rotation and image acquisition. There is a tendency for slight vibrational moments to occur in the spec-imen in the step-wise rotation approach. It is advisable to use a skip function to avoid this effect, by not considering the .rst image in each step. However, a continuous scanning approach may not introduce any 
vibrational 
moments 
[80]. Multiple images can be captured and av-eraged to reduce the noise and improve the image quality in each step in the stepwise rotation approach. The number of steps depends on the size of the sample based on the magni.cation. A greater number of steps, involving a larger quantity of images, is bene.cial for a good re-construction, only if a higher magni.cation is required. 
(d) Filtration 
Filters are used for minimizing image artifacts. There are two types of .ltering approaches commonly employed during image acquisition: 
(i) 
beam .ltering and (ii) detector .ltering. If .lters can be applied be-tween the X-ray tube and the specimen, referred to as beam .ltering, or between the specimen and the detector, referred to as detector .lter-ing. The function of beam .ltering is to protect the specimen from the beam hardening effect, such that streak artifacts can be ignored. Detec-tor .ltering is used to reduce the noise from the remitting secondary X-rays, which may be produced when the specimen is denser or nano-structured 
[77]. 
(e) 
Image binarization 
Image binarization is an essential step in the .eld of optical character recognition (OCR) [81]. Within binarization, thresholding is an impor-tant step for identifying different materials in the XCT images based on their grayscale values [82]. Otsu's and Gaussian Ostu's methods are widely used thresholding algorithms for measuring the grayscale values in XCT images [83,84]. It is widely recognized that between the two methods, Gaussian Ostu's method provides more accurate results than Otsu's method [85]. 
2.2. Classi.cations of XCT 
There are three types of commonly-used XCT system that are based on frame rate, namely (a) medical XCT (up to 10 projections/s), 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
(b) synchrotron XCT (up to 10,000 projections/s) and (c) laboratory XCT (approximately 1 s 每 10 
min/projection) 
[86]. In medical XCT, the X-ray source and detector rotate around the patient. In contrast, the specimen rotates while the X-ray source and detector are stationary in the synchrotron and laboratory XCT. In the .eld of engineering, the lat-ter two are mainly used, and therefore, their use in understanding and improving aerospace composite manufacturing techniques will be discussed in this manuscript. 
2.2.1. Synchrotron XCT vs. laboratory XCT 
A synchrotron XCT (SXCT) offers a relatively high resolution, ranging from 30 nm to 20 米m, which can be attributed to the use of a coherent source with a parallel monochromatic beam. It is more expensive than the laboratory XCT (LXCT). It also offers a better signal to noise ratio, al-though limitations in the sample size (between 20 米m and 50 mm) is a major drawback. In contrast, the maximum sample size possible with the LXCT varies from 50 米m to 300 mm, and the resolution range varies from 50 nm to 100 米m[8]. The lower resolution and higher acquisition time are due to the use of a polychromatic light source and cone beam. The LXCT technique can further be categorized into two based on the focal spot size of the X-ray tube: (i) low-.ux re.ection type with a focal spot size of b1 米m, and (ii) high-.ux re.ection type with the focal spot size N1 米m[87]. However, compared to SXCT, the LXCT tech-nique has a low X-ray .ux [88]. As a result, the specimen scanning time using SXCT is fast. Also, SXCT provides a higher brightness than LXCT. Further, resin .ow tracking inside .ber tows is dif.cult with the LXCT technique due to its low spatial resolution. However, it could be possible to 
view 
this, 
to 
some 
extent, 
in 
the 
SXCT 
[59,89]. 
2.2.2. In-situ vs. ex-situ loading 
XCT can be further classi.ed as in-situ and ex-situ for time-lapse studies. In-situ imaging can be performed inside the XCT, and the scan-ning process can be interrupted or uninterrupted. The application of LXCT is mostly limited to interrupted scans, due to its low .ux and high acquisition characteristics; otherwise, high image contrast is not possible 
[3]. 
For fracture mechanics, ex-situ imaging can be performed after re-moving the specimen from a mechanical test machine and placing it in-side the XCT for further analysis. There are two major drawbacks to this approach. For example, consider the case of understanding crack behav-ior: 
(i) 
a 
crack 
may 
close 
after 
unloading 
the 
specimen 
[90]. (ii) Contrast agents are usually added to improve the detectability of cracks, which may change the mechanical performance of the composite during fur-ther testing [91]. However, the crack closure effect can be quanti.ed using in-situ XCT [92]; therefore, the contrast agents are not usually used here. 
2.3. Advantages and limitations of XCT 
The ability to generate a 3D voxel geometry based on 2D radial slices is the main advantage of using XCT. The 3D information includes .ber waviness, .ber orientation, individual volume fractions of the constitu-ents in FRP composites, morphological information regarding voids, such 
as 
their 
shape 
and 
roundness, 
etc., 
[88]. The XCT provides detailed 3D information even for complex 3D geometries as compared to other destructive and non-destructive methods. However, apart from these advantages, there are certain disadvantages of the XCT. These are mainly related to high capital costs, the need for skilled operators, and the time required for post-processing. One of the reasons for the high costs of the XCT machine is due to the custom-built X-ray tube, which is the major component in the XCT setup. The function of the X-ray tube is to accelerate the electrons to high energies for generating X-rays. In doing this, the machine consumes a lot of electrical energy, out of which only a fraction of its energy is converted to X-rays and the remainder is turned into heat. To deal with the high heat, the X-ray tubes need to be designed to accommodate this effect [93]with periodic maintenance after the operation. Otherwise, X-ray tubes are prone to failure, such as normal aging (.lament burnout, arcing, etc.), process failures, application mismatch, improper drive by the power supply and tube enclosure considerations, etc., [94]. These failure modes result in extra costs. 
The other signi.cant disadvantage of XCT is that a high capacity computer data storage device is required to store the XCT scanned and reconstructions data since the .le size for each scanned specimen is usually several gigabytes (GB) [95]. In particular, the quantity of data (sum of experimental data and images) for in-situ XCT scans is usually greater than that for ex-situ scans. However, the former gives more ac-curate results. Also, SXCT scans consume more data than LXCT scans [96]. 
2.4. Challenges associated with XCT of FRP composites and remedies 
(a) Low X-ray attenuation coef.cient 
The major challenge associated with XCT of composites, mainly when using LXCT during acquisition and post-processing, is achieving a high contrast image (a high X-ray attenuation coef.cient), particularly for those materials which have a low density and a low atomic number. Such materials exhibit a low X-ray attenuation coef.cient (米) when the X-ray impinges on it, as 米 is directly proportional to these two parame-ters [14]. For example, the attenuation coef.cient of a carbon/epoxy composite is low since it has a low density. Also, the difference in den-sity between the carbon .ber 
and 
the 
epoxy 
matrix 
is 
small 
[97]. As a re-sult, it is dif.cult to identify intra-tow voids at low resolutions in such types of composites. A high resolution can be obtained using a small sample [98]. 
(b) Dif.culties in capturing the .nest damage mechanisms 
Another challenge is identifying transverse ply (90∼) cracks in com-posites using ex-situ XCT. It is dif.cult to identify such damage since transverse ply cracks result in only a slight reduction in the overall stiff-ness of the structure, and tend to change its failure mechanisms while handling and placing the specimen in the XCT for scanning [12,99]. For example, the NASA X-33 launch vehicle program was interrupted due to a leakage found in the liquid nitrogen tanks induced by trans-verse ply cracking [100]. However, these narrow cracks can be seen via 
a 
combination 
of 
phase 
contrast 
and 
in-situ 
XCT 
loading 
[101,102]. 
The .nest damage mechanisms or defects (matrix micro-cracks, transverse ply cracks, .ber breaks, etc.) can be detected by employing propagation-based phase contrast in the SXCT [7,103,104]. The propagation-based phase-contrast method is suited only to coherent or semi-coherent sources. Phase-contrast can be enhanced by maintain-ing the greatest distance between the detector and the sample, or the smallest 
distance 
between 
the 
sample 
and 
the 
X-ray 
source 
[105]. This distance depends on the sample size and the wavelength of the X-rays [3]. Another way to enhance image contrast and render micro-cracks more visible is through the use of gratings [106,107] and by staining [65]. However, staining could induce defects in the form of matrix crack growth, etc., such details are reported elsewhere in the literature [3]. 
(c) Sample size restrictions 
A good spatial resolution can be achieved with a smaller sample size, as mentioned earlier. It is dif.cult to measure the yarn volume fraction in a larger sample, due to lower spatial resolution. This is the reason in most of the cases, solid inter-tow regions are considered for .ow 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
modeling [108,109]. A remedy for accurately measuring the yarn vol-ume fraction is to choose a smaller voxel size. 
XCT machines struggle to scan large .at, or planar composite panels, due to sample size restrictions. However, a modi.ed XCT technique called computed laminography, can be used to scan these types of panels 
[100,101]. 
3. Modeling using XCT generated material models 
XCT data contains valuable information that can be generated at dif-ferent stages of the manufacturing process, and that information can be extracted in the form of a material model and applied to better under-stand and improve the process. The potential of the XCT for generating numerical models to predict the effect of varying LCM process parame-ters on the dry .ber compaction behavior, the permeability, and voids may lead to a reduction in the processing time and an enhancement in 
the 
component 
quality 
[17,110每112]. Three-dimensional geometrical models are well-suited to perform simulations, characterization, and modeling 
operations 
[16]. Fig. 
4 
shows the key steps required to develop XCT-generated material models for virtual design and processing. 
In the .rst step, reconstructed XCT images of fabric/prepregs are converted into a three-dimensional voxel geometry. As a result, a voxel-based micro-/meso-scale geometrical model is created. The size of the voxel geometry depends on the selected representative volume elements (RVE). Several RVEs at different locations in the fabric/Prepreg are chosen before taking the average. In the next step, XCT based mate-rial model is generated and the segmentation procedure is performed on the geometrical model to identify the anisotropic-threshold value, density, etc., based on the gray values of each constituent in dry fabric or prepregs. The obtained information from the segmented volume can be used to create a computational model. The computational model can be used to perform simulations (such as compaction, .ow, curing, etc.) for virtual manufacturing. Here, it should be emphasized that real XCT generated materials models have not been widely used in the literature. Instead, pseudo-material models are commonly uti-lized to understand the design and process modeling. Pseudo-material models ignore some of the microstructural features, such as .ber diam-eter, distribution, and orientation within the yarn and assume that the tows are solid. In this review, we mainly focus on reviewing how these pseudo-material models can be used in understanding and im-proving the design and modeling process. 
3.1. Compaction models based on XCT 
Recently, several researchers 
[17,113] have developed realistic unit cell models based on tow data obtained from the XCT and used them for simulating the compaction behavior of real textile composites. Such models are based on the multi-chain digital element method (MCDEM) or the digital element method (DEM) [114,115]. This ap-proach has great potential for predicting the compaction behavior of fabrics. In this method, each yarn is represented as multiple frictionless 1D digital chain elements. These chain elements act like .bers in a real fabric. The advantage of the DEM approach is that the .nal fabric con.g-uration is independent of the choice of the initial cross-sectional shape [18,115]. However, unlike the real yarn, which has several thousand micro-.bers, offering resistance to tow spreading in the form of friction and .ber entanglement, the FE modeled yarn has few macro-.bers. Consequently, frictional forces between the .bers are ignored. This leads to the spreading of the tows, attributed to a lack of resistance to deformation 
[116]. Besides, the DEM approach is feasible only for cap-turing periodic deformations (constant unit cell) due to its high compu-tational cost. Variations in inter-tow and intra-tow pore geometries can also be more accurately simulated for different loading conditions using this approach. Any errors are because the number of .bers in a simu-lated yarn is different (lower) compared to experimental results from the XCT. 
The Virtual Textile Morphology Suite (VTMS) [17] or LS-Dyna [18] can be used to run the DEM based simulations. In general, the area of each .lament is greater in the simulated yarn than in the experiment to match the local intra-tow .ber volume fraction, since the simulated tow has a smaller number of .bers. 
DEM does not accurately predict the mechanical response of the fab-ric, due to the smaller number of beam element chains in the yarn and the absence of any interaction between them. However, it accurately predicts the deformation of the fabric architecture during compaction. This can be overcome by using the same number of digital element chains as the number of .bers in the yarn. However, this leads to a high computational cost and a longer run time. In contrast, high .delity modeling 
[117] successfully captures both the kinematic and mechani-cal behavior of the fabric. In this method, a meso-geometry is initially adopted from the DEM and meshed with hexahedral elements. Further, the micro-scale yarn properties obtained from the experiment are used as an input in the .nite element modeling (FEM) software using a 
Preprocessing Block of XCT Generated Material Models 
Characteris cs Building Block 
Virtual Design and Processing Block 
Simulaon Results 
Fig. 4. Virtual design and processing models using XCT generated material models. 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
hyperelastic constitutive model. XCT data-driven compaction models are not extensively studied in the literature, and there is still a need to develop compaction models to better understand the tow behavior and associated geometrical and process parameters at different levels of compaction. Besides, there is also a need to develop a strain-rate de-pendent XCT based compaction model for understanding the fabric be-havior from quasi-static to dynamic loading conditions. Strain rate dependent compaction modeling will be useful to predict the global and localized failure regions in a fabric. These failure mechanisms occur when sudden loads (e.g., tool drops) act on the fabric structure. 
3.2. Permeability models based on XCT 
The Geometric Permeability Estimator (GPE) [111] and the hybrid (XCT 
and 
CFD) 
[118,119] approaches are commonly used for predicting permeability numerically. GPE requires different stages of resin infusion data as input through in-situ XCT. Hence, employing GPE is expensive, 
Table 1 
though it provides closer results to CFD. On the other hand, the hybrid approach can run in Math-to-Market's Geodict software or any .ow analysis software after generating the voxel mesh using XCT recon-structed images. Such software predicts the inter-yarn permeability using the Navier-Stokes approach and intra-yarn permeability using ei-ther Darcy's approach or the Brinkman approach [120]. The hybrid ap-proach is CFD-based and has recently demonstrated an ability to compute fabric permeability [56]. 
3.3. Void prediction models based on XCT 
Unlike several numerical models used in the case of compaction and permeability of .ber preforms, numerical models, using XCT data as input for predicting the void formation, movement and characterization are very limited. However, the LIMS and PAM RTM software packages are well suited to predicting dry spots using a hybrid approach (exper-imental data, including XCT, and FEM) [68,121,122]. The geometry of 
Process parameters in OoA and Autoclave manufacturing techniques References 
Dry .ber Compaction Prepreg Compaction Permeability Air Permeability Void formation and characterization 
Thompson et al. [117] Desplentere et al. [112] Naouar et al. [125]RTM----

Green et al. [18, 113] Yousaf et al. [17, 170] Yan et al. [179, 230] Zeng et al.[120] --RTM --Tahir et al. [231] Straumit et al. [109] RTM -RTM --Salvatori et al. [197] RTM ---RTM Schell et al. [122] --RTM -RTM Schell et al. [68] Sisodia et al. [62]
----RTM Suzuki et al. [223] Zeng et al. [232]RTM-RTM --Ali et al. [56, 108, 119] Soltani et al. [129, 130] Laghaei et al. [118]--RTM --
Caglar et al. [208] Bodaghi et al. [39, 233] RI ----Saidet al.[19] RI -RI --Hemmer et al. [57, 58] Vila et al. [59]
--RI -RI Larson et al. [111, 194] Bossio et al. 
Awaja et al. [234] ----RFI Leonard et al. [235] --AFP/RTM/RI --Endruweit et al. [110] AFP/RTM/RI -AFP/RTM/RI --Aziz et al. [29] Zhang et al. [236, 237] ---HLU/VBO HLU/VBO Schechter et al. [238] Centea et al. [239] ---HLU/VBO -Kratz and Hubert [240] -HLU/VBO -HLU/VBO HLU/VBO Kratz and Hubert [241] -HLU/VBO -HLU/VBO -Cender et al. [242] Torres et al. 
[243] Centea and Hubert [244, 245] ----HLU/VBO Grunenfelder et al. [246] Little et al. [247] Lambert et al. [248] AFP 
----Belnoue et al. [249]
/Autoclave 
AFP 
---AFP/Autoclave Pearson et al. 224, 250]
/Autoclave Stamopoulos et al. 
[124, 251] Tserpes et al. [252] ----HLU/Autoclave Aratama et al. [253] Landro et al. [254] Plessix et al. [255] Mehdikhani [131, 222]
----ATL/Autoclave 
Comer et al. [256] AFP/RI and ATL Nguyen et al. [257, 258]--AFP/RI and ATL/Autoclave -
/Autoclave Straumit et al. [259] 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
the micro-pores and longitudinal .ber bundles can be created using 1D and 2D elements, respectively. Gourichon et al. [123]usedLIMSto gen-erate models for micro-void prediction. In contrast, several post-processing tools that support the XCT images, such as VGStudio Max, Avizo, Simpleware, ImageJ, iAnalyse, etc. [4,105,124] in analyzing voids. Using XCT images as input data, some of the recent compaction, permeability, and void characterization models are presented in Table 
1. 
4. The application of XCT based material models in OoA processing 
4.1. Liquid composite molding (LCM) 
LCM techniques have been commonly used in the manufacture of aircraft structural components, such as wing box structures [133,134] and the Mitsubishi Regional Jet (MRJ) empennage box structure [133], automotive components for example doors, roofs and side panels, etc. [135,136], helicopter unitized structure (aerodynamic beanie) [137] and marine applications [138]. 
In the LCM process, during preforming (draping and compaction), geometrical variations, such as changes in the fabric internal architec-ture and cross-sectional shape of the tows are known to occur. These variations are much more likely to occur in dry fabrics than in prepregs, due to absence of resin. As a consequence, nesting of the layers is more signi.cant, leading to a reduction in permeability [139]. 
For observing void generation and transportation in both the RTM and resin infusion techniques, the tracking of the .ow front is important as the resin .ows through the micro and macro gaps in the .brous pre-forms. In particular, the tracking of the .ow-through 3D fabrics is dif.-cult due to their complex internal structure. Some in-situ techniques, such as direct .ow 
observation 
using 
a 
camera 
[63,140], dielectric sen-sors [141], digital image correlation (DIC) [142], and ultrasonic C-scan 
[143] are effective in capturing the .ow through the macro-pores in a fabric. However, these techniques fail to monitor the .ow through the micro-pores, due to their insuf.cient spatial resolution. X-ray radiogra-phy is capable of capturing the resin .ow front, however, it is not suit-able for capturing micron level porosity [144]. In contrast, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a useful technique for studying .ow prop-agation in .ber tows [145,146]. The advanced in-situ SXCT technique not only facilitates tracking the .ow in both micro-and macro-pore re-gions, but it also measures the size, shape, and spatial distribution of the voids [91]. 
Therefore, understanding the compaction, permeability, and void distribution of fabrics in the LCM process is essential with the aid of XCT. Using numerical modeling, a number of attempts have been made 
that 
involve 
changing 
various 
process 
parameters 
[147] to attain an 
autoclave 
quality 
component, 
in 
less 
time 
and 
for 
less 
cost 
[148,149]. 
4.1.1. Compaction characterization 
An understanding of transverse compaction response of the rein-forcement in the RTM or resin infusion process is essential, given that it directly in.uences the resin permeability through the fabric, the .ber volume fraction, the thickness of the laminate, and ultimately the mechanical properties of the composite [150]. Several researchers [55,151,152] have studied the compaction response of preforms and re-ported that the degree of compaction depended on the weave architec-ture of the fabric (2D and 3D), the thread density in stitched fabrics, mesoscale geometrical features of yarns, the number of layers, dry and wet fabrics, and most importantly, the nesting of the layers within the fabric. 
Despite previous use of several 2D visualization techniques for ob-serving the microstructural changes of preforms after compaction and resin infusion [136,153], there has been little focus on the 3D response of preforms during or after compaction using XCT. The XCT is a promis-ing tool for capturing variations in the yarn-geometry in-situ. Further, a number of software packages (Avizo, Geodict, VoxTex, etc.) are avail-able for creating the 3D geometry from XCT sliced images, as discussed earlier in [29,108]. In particular, relevant information, such as the de-gree of anisotropy, .ber orientation, average gray value (AGV), etc., can be obtained using the VoxTex software package after the voxel model is generated using the XCT images [154]. The anisotropy-thresholded value is the precise border between the different materials (e.g., .ber, air, etc.) in the scanned image, which can be obtained from the anisotropy curve in a 1D histogram or the anisotropy vs. density curve from a 2D histogram. The position of the .bers and air gaps in a dry fabric and the matrix in addition to the .berand airgaps incompos-ites can also be obtained in 3D, based on the anisotropy-thresholded value, after exporting the voxel geometry in the ParaView software package, which is in-built in VoxTex. 
4.1.1.1. Mesoscale compaction models. Determining the compaction be-havior of preforms experimentally is expensive, as it requires man-power, several specimens for carrying out a suf.cient number of trials and advanced instruments. Moreover, it is a lengthy process. To avoid this, it is important to accurately model the compaction behavior of fab-rics numerically. In 
doing 
so, 
some 
researchers 
[125,155] have generally used three different mesoscale unit cell models based on the textile ge-ometry. One is directly created using textile geometrical modeling soft-ware packages, such as TexGen [156] or WiseTex [157], by making several assumptions, such as straight warp and weft yarns (no crimp), a constant cross-section (no waviness), etc., thereby creating an ideal-ized geometry. The second model (realistic model) is a simulated geom-etry by DEM, which can also be created using textile geometrical modeling software. However, the geometry is considered the same as those of actual geometry obtained from XCT scanning after reconstruc-tion. The third technique is an analytical approach, where the geometry created from the theoretical approach can be re-created after de.ning the center points, and section points based on the cross-sections of the warp and .ll yarns using sinusoidal functions and measurements from the actual fabric. The methodology for creating the analytical geometry and its formulation are reported elsewhere [158每160]. The simulation time for an idealized geometry is less than that associated with the DEM and analytical methods. However, the idealized solution is less ac-curate and ignores realistic features, such as yarn waviness and yarn pinching [125]. A superposition of the ideal, DEM, and analytical model results (scanned specimens from a 3D woven orthogonal carbon fabric) is shown in Fig. 
5(i)(a-c), respectively. 
It is clear from Fig. 
5(i) that the idealized approach gives poor results compared to the other models. The DEM and analytical models offer re-sults that are closer to the experimental (XCT) results. A comparison of the deformed cross-sectional area between XCT and for different meso-scale models in each section [.ll (ZX1 and ZX2) and warp (ZY1 and ZY2)] including the global (sum of ZX1, ZX2, ZY1, and ZY2) are shown in Fig. 
5(ii). It is clear that the predicted cross-sectional areas from the DEM and analytical approaches correlate well with the XCT results. 
4.1.1.2. Meso-macro-scale compaction models. The use of mesoscale models is restricted to the unit cell level, particularly for complex inter-action geometries and 3D fabrics, due to their high computational cost and inability to capture tool geometry effects at this scale during the compaction step in an LCM process. A meso-and macro-scale model was proposed by Said et al. [19] to overcome the limitations of meso-scale models and, for numerically capturing the deformation of fabrics, at both the meso-and macro-scales during LCM, based on a tessellation algorithm. In this process, the mesoscale DEM geometry was used as an input in the .nite element modeling (FEM) software to create the macro-scale geometry 
[126]. 
Unlike the periodic conditions in the case of a single unit cell meso-scale model, large structures can be modeled using hundreds of unit cells to simulate non-periodic deformations based on tessellation. In this case, the slave and master yarn concepts are used for creating a non-periodic unit cell from one layer to another layer throughout the stack 
[127]. This approach predicts the same results as those found in 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
(a) XCT vs. Ideal approach (b) XCT vs. DEM (c) XCT vs. Analytical approach 
ii 
Fig. 5. (i) 
Superposition 
of 
warp, 
weft 
and 
binder 
yarns 
of 
different 
mesoscale 
models 
on 
the 
XCT 
results 
[155], Note: ZX1 and ZX2 are .ll, ZY1 and ZY2 are warp. (ii) Comparison of the cross-sectional area for each section between XCT and for different mesoscale modeling approaches. 
the XCT, such as empty spaces (resin pockets) at the apex (1) and tool macro-modeling, and a hyperelastic constitutive law [163]for corners (2), yarn overlaps (3), etc., as shown in Fig. 
6. meso-modeling by importing the yarn properties obtained from 
Common defects, such as wrinkling, yarn buckling, and distor-the experiments. Despite the shorter running time of the macro-tions, occur when the textile fabric is draped over the mold. Most im-draping model compared to MMZ, it failed to capture the local distor-portantly, these defects typically occur when placing the fabric over tions. The authors did not use XCT data as an input for MMZ simula-a 3D mold due to the presence of corners, edges, and curvatures. In a tions. However, XCT offers great potential for reducing the modeling recent study, Iwata et al. [161,162] proposed a coupled meso-macro time and gives more information related to defects that occur during zoom (MMZ) simulation method to simulate these features, includ-the draping process. Moreover, XCT images can be used for validat-ing local distortions, and observed good agreement with experi-ing the MMZ results. Therefore, further studies are required to inves-ments. They used a membrane-shell continuous approach for tigate the use of XCT for MMZ. 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
Fig. 6. Defects in vacuum infused carbon/epoxy composite (XCT) vs. macro-scale 
model 
[19]. 
4.1.1.3. Compaction of .ber reinforcements. The compaction behavior of .brous preforms in the LCM process, speci.cally the compaction of the .bers from the vacuum bag to the tool side, can be simulated using the viscoelastic response of the fabric [150]. The viscoelastic re-sponse of the fabric depends on the applied pressure, temperature, lu-brication, strain-rate, creep, relaxation (single and multiple loading), and cyclic 
loading 
[164每166]. A higher load is required for compacting a dry preform due to more gaps being available compared to wet (lubri-cated) 
preforms 
[167]. 
Fig. 
7(a) and (b) show the change in warp and weft tow areas re-spectively in a single layer plain-woven E-glass fabric, as the pressure is increased from 10 kPa 每 100 kPa, for experimental (XCT) and numer-ical (DEM) approaches. The area of the warp and weft tows decreases in the experimental results with increasing pressure, due to a decrease in tow thickness, though the tow width remains constant. The area of the warp and weft tows is smaller in the DEM simulations than the ex-perimental results. Furthermore, the decrease in tow area in the DEM data over this pressure range is not only in.uenced by the change in thickness, but also by a slight decrease in tow width [17]. 
In general, structural components for use in most engineering appli-cations, especially aerospace and automotive structural members, are fabricated using more than one layer or ply. Therefore, understanding the compaction behavior of multi-layer preforms is important. Nesting and shifting of layers are the main factors for differences in the compac-tion 
response 
of 
dry 
single 
and 
multi-layer 
preforms 
[168]. 
The compaction behavior of single and multilayer fabric preforms was studied [169] by performing in-situ compaction tests inside the XCT. It was found that the number of nesting increases in multilayer preforms if the .oat length of the yarn decreases and the yarn spacing and the number of layers increases. There may be an absence of nesting in some layers in multi-layer preforms when an insuf.cient load is ap-plied, in this case, the channels remain open for void transportation, this can be seen in the XCT image in Fig. 
8. It is worth noting from the .gure that the larger channels in the non-nested layers are associated with the regions of higher permeability. The ability of the XCT to capture this nesting effect is attractive. Differences in the order of magnitude exist between the permeability of fabrics exhibiting nesting and zero-nesting [39]. The nesting effect was numerically studied through a high .delity model by Thompson et al. [117]. XCT images were used as input for developing the high .delity model. This model requires minimum input data compared to other macro-scale models. This model can predict both the kinematic and mechanical properties of the fabric. These results were found to be in agreement with the exper-imental results (XCT). 
When manufacturing structural components for high-performance applications, a fabric should have high permeability for fast processing, adequate drapability and should exhibit good mechanical properties, which is possible with a high .ber volume content. However, the per-meability decreases with increasing .ber volume fraction (Vf)as shown by Eq. (1) 
[171]. 
.汕Vf
K . 汐 e e1T 
where 汐 and 汕 are permeability constants; The lower permeability of multi-layer 2D fabrics that is associated with nesting can be overcome by using 3D fabrics. However, further studies are required to understand the compaction behavior of 3D fabrics. 
The need to use multiple thin 2D fabric plies for achieving the target thickness can be eliminated, and the fabrication time can be reduced by using 
3D 
fabrics 
[136]. The 3D fabrics have through-thickness .bers (Z-
Fig. 7. Comparison of tow widths between experimental results (XCT) and DEM for different compaction levels: (a) Warp tows and 
(b) 
Weft 
tows 
[17]. 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
Fig. 8. Effect of nesting and non-nesting on the resin .ow channels in multilayer stack using XCT [170]. 
binder yarns) running through at different interlocking angles. These binder yarns prevent the fabric from nesting and increase the trans-verse compaction properties (strength and stiffness) and permeabil-ity by maintaining a high Vf [172]. 3D fabrics also offer a high intra-laminar shear strength and impact resistance, which is attributed to stiffer binder yarns protecting the structure from delamination [173每176]. Therefore, 3D fabric composites are being increasingly used in the manufacture of aerospace structural components, partic-ularly for fabricating engine fan blades, due to their excellent out-of-plane properties [150,177]. The maximum applied pressure of 1 atm in resin infusion leads to a lower Vf in 3D fabrics. Therefore, manufacturing 3D composites by RTM is bene.cial compared to resin infusion [178]. 
Blunt 
The main factors that govern the compaction behavior of 3D fabrics are yarn stack shifting, tow .attening, and bending [172]. These geo-metrical variations were observed using an XCT by Yan et al. [179]. The XCT is a versatile tool for investigating both the compaction behav-ior of 3D fabrics and its composites and for generating numerical models [112,180,181]. Liu et al. [154] studied the linear and non-linear behavior of 3D orthogonal woven fabric composites with the help of XCT. Saleh et al. [182] developed a micro-mechanics based damage mechanics model for 3D orthogonal woven fabric composites using a mesoscale voxel model created through XCT. 
In general, a structure tensor approach is used for 2D fabrics, since the yarns are positioned in all directions [125]. However, the Texture Analysis for Image Segmentation method is well suited to 3D fabrics [128]. This method is used to split and analyze the warp, weft, and Z-binder yarns separately in XCT images. The numerical model based on DEM is well suited for predicting the .nal geometry and compaction re-sponse of 3D fabrics, as shown in Fig. 
9. The geometric variability of 3D fabrics in DEM simulations agrees well with XCT experiments for differ-ent compaction levels based on their target .ber volume fractions. How-ever, there was a slight deviation found in the compacted geometry of the Z-binder yarn between these two cases, particularly for low com-paction (Vf =45% andVf = 48.75%) levels. In Fig. 
9,the topsurface of the Z-binder yarn was found to be .at and the shape of the tows under this top surface was elliptical in XCT scans. In contrast, the top surface of the Z-binder yarn was found to be sharp and the circular shape of tows under this top surface was seen, in DEM simulations. However, yarn crimping and waviness followed the trends that were observed in the experiments [18]. 
4.1.2. Permeability characterization 
The XCT technique can play an essential role in permeability predic-tions of dry fabrics during the injection stage of LCM manufacturing. Permeability is an essential parameter in the LCM process, and its value depends on the .ber architecture/volume fraction, resin viscosity, porosity, and the other processing parameters (injection pressure, .ow rates, temperature, etc.) [183]. In particular, the permeability of UD .-brous structures depends on several parameters, such as the thickness of the fabric, .ber randomness in the fabric, .ber diameter, and the 
Elliptical Circular Sharp 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
Dimensionless Permeability(K11/r2) 
Permeability ratio (non-uniform/hexagonal) 
Tomadakis & Robertson (Overlapping-Analy cal) Tomadakis & Robertson (Non-overlapping-Analy cal) Drummond & Tahir (Analy cal) Westhuizen & Plesis (Analy cal) Sangani &Yao (Analy cal) Roy et al. (Experimental) Anderson & Warburton (Experimental) 
Sullivan & Hertel (Experimental) 
+ Williams et al. (Experimental) Tomography-based method (Moderately Aligned -CFD) Current work (Experimental) Current work (CFD) 
Porosity (汍) 
Fig. 10. Comparison of axial permeability of randomly UD .brous structure between experimental, numerical (CFD), hybrid (XCT and CFD) and analytical approaches [118]. 
porosity 
[129,130]. On the one hand, for a known porosity, the perme-ability decreases with increasing .ber diameter. On the other hand, the permeability increases with increasing porosity for a constant .ber diameter 
[118]. Fig. 
10 
shows the variation of the axial permeability of random UD .brous structures with porosity for different approaches, namely experimental, numerical (CFD), hybrid (XCT and CFD) and ana-lytical 
[184每187]. 
It can be observed from Fig. 
10 
that the CFD results agree very well with the experimental results and the tomography-based method. However, the relative standard deviation of experimentally measured permeability from the literature is N30%, due to the adoption of non-standard experimental setups. On the other hand, the analytical methods do not fully agree with the experimental results and CFD. This may be due to the underlying assumptions adopted in deriving the equations. 
The Geometric Permeability Estimator (GPE) is a new computational tool for predicting the permeability of .ber 
beds 
[111]. Fig. 
11 
indicates that the predicted permeability ratio using GPE compared with CFD 
[188] and unit cell models based on an area-weighted average, available in the literature [189每192]. The detailed modeling approach for Voronoi KC 
and 
Shou 
were 
reported 
elsewhere 
[191,193]. Good agreement with b6% deviation was obtained between the GPE and CFD approaches. In contrast to the GPE and CFD methods, unit cell models, such as Voronoi KC, Voronoi Shou, and sliding cell Shou underestimate and Delaunay KC method overestimates the GPE predictions. The drawback associated with these methods is that they assume that the .ber arrangements are either square or hexagonal. 
However, the problems associated with GPE are complicated since it requires inputs (.ow channeling and .ber positions before, during, and after impregnation, void, and resin information) in the form of images from in-situ XCT. In-situ XCT studies for permeability measurements are limited due to the high cost of the .xture and space limitations in-side the XCT. As a consequence, this restricts sample size [194,195]. 
Recently 
[57,58], and for the .rst time, continuous capturing of the deformation behavior of quasi-unidirectional (UD) non-crimp fabrics during resin infusion was achieved with the aid of the in-situ SXCT. The downsized setup is designed inside the XCT, such that the dry state of the fabric before infusion and saturated state after infusion are successfully captured. It is worth noting that the geometry changes that have been captured through this setup, include the vertical dis-placement of the tows, through-thickness tow swelling, and the in-crease in stack thickness. 
Vila et al. [59] examined tow level impregnation using in-situ SXCT. The ability of in-situ SXCT to capture detail at the tow level is highly valuable, due to its high resolution compared to LXCT. Fig. 
12 
represents the transverse .ow perpendicular to the E-glass tow captured simulta-neously at three different locations. A high local .ber volume fraction is seen in the regions of high capillary pressure. The wet region is highlighted in navy blue (Fig. 
12a). Transverse .ow is reduced in re-
3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 

Sliding cell Shou Sliding cell KC Delaunay Shou Delaunay KC Voronoi Shou Voronoi KC GPECFD 
Fig. 11. Comparison of Permeability ratio with CFD, GPE and area-weighted average six 
gions where high local .ber volume fraction is apparent in the .gure, this leads to a decrease in permeability. It is worth noting that the per-meability and capillary pressures are contradicting each other. 
In general, for viscous resins, the optimum capillary number (Ca) can be obtained when the .ow propagates at an extremely low velocity, which leads to a high impregnation time. A high impregnation time is a major concern in composites manufacturing. To produce a high-quality product in a low impregnation time, further studies are required. A low impregnation time can be achieved through a detailed XCT analysis of the .brous preform. Figs. 
13 
(i) and (ii) correspond to unsaturated and saturated .ow through quasi-unidirectional non-crimp fabrics dur-ing resin infusion captured using in-situ SXCT. The capillary number in-creases from 4 ℅ 10.5 to 2 ℅ 10.3 as the applied pressure increases from 0 to 552 kPa. As a result, the impregnation time decreases from 
11.3 min (when both capillary forces drive the .ow and no pressure is applied) to 5.4 min (when the .ow is driven by both capillary forces, and 552 kPa applied pressure), as indicated in Fig. 
13(ii). Complete sat-uration occurs in the latter case 
[111]. 
For most aerospace and defense applications, 2D fabric composites are frequently used due to their high energy absorption capability com-pared 
to 
unidirectional 
composites 
[196]. Hence, there is a need to study the permeability of 2D fabrics. The saturated permeability of G-Ply (NCF) is one order of magnitude higher than G-weave (woven fabric) 
different unit 
cell 
models 
[111]. [197]. Hence, the former is better suited for high-viscosity resins, 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
especially to thermoplastic resins [198]. Differences in the mesoscale geometries of the two fabrics are the reason for the higher permeability of G-ply. Three different mesoscale geometries are observed in G-ply, based on variations in the number of layers as the level of compaction is different for each case, which can be seen from XCT and binary con-verted images shown in Fig. 
14. The meso-channel shapes in the unit cells are rectangular, hybrid (the combination of rectangular and trian-gular) and triangular, for 4, 5, and 6 layers, respectively. The shape change from rectangular to triangular occurs with an increase in the number of layers from 4 to 6. This is attributed to a combination of shrinkage and bending of the .ber bundles in the transverse direction. The rectangular pores cover a wider area than their hybrid and triangu-lar counterparts, and as a result, the saturated permeability is higher in this case. Such studies can be conducted on virtually any type of fabric with the aid of XCT geometric modeling to better understand the satu-ration behavior of laminates. 
Auniform .ow front is usually not possible with woven fabrics [38]; therefore, further studies are needed to attain a uniform .ow front and, most importantly, enhance the permeability of woven glass fabrics. Thin random fabrics (isotropic .ber preforms) have a single macro or bulk permeability as the micro-tows contain hundreds of .bers, which are loosely packed. As a result, the .ow through the preform is considered as homogeneous, i.e., the gaps (micro and mesopores) behind the .ow front are assumed to be .lled. Therefore, the continuity equation and Darcy's law are suf.cient to determine the macro-permeability [41]. For such cases, low-resolution XCT data is suf.cient to predict the permeability. 
In contrast, the .ow through tows cannot be ignored in the case of woven fabrics, due to their multi-scale .brous structure [199]. An XCT data-driven geometrical model can be developed using Geodict or VoxTex software packages. Having detailed features of the structure of the dual-scale fabric is desirable to compute the permeability accu-rately. Dual-scale .brous media rely on a sink effect at high capillary numbers, while the sink effect is negligible at low capillary numbers. As a consequence, .ow through a dual-scale .brous media resembles a single-scale 
medium 
[200]. However, to exactly model .ow through woven fabrics, the Navier-Stokes equation can be used for open regions to predict the macro permeability, and Darcy's equation can be used to model .ow through the .ber tows (micro-permeability). In the partic-ular case of a low pore Reynolds number, which is common in compos-ites, the model can be further simpli.ed to the Stokes equation. However, such coupling is inappropriate for solving the system of equa-tions when one uses Darcy's equation for analyzing the tow regions, since this equation does not have a shear stress term. Therefore, for modeling tows, researchers have replaced Darcy's equation with the Brinkman equation 
[201,202]. Shou et al. [189] proposed an analytical 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
(i) Capillary number of 4x10-5 and zero (ii) Capillary number of 2x10-3 and the applied pressure applied pressure of 522 kPa 
model for the quick prediction of in-plane permeability in a dual-scale .brous media. The input parameters such as .ber volume fraction, number of .laments, and .lament diameter are required for this model. Several researchers [16,119,203,204] have used the Kozeny-Carman equation for predicting the permeability of fabrics. More details about the modeling approaches are reported elsewhere 
[205]. 
A number of researchers [206,207] have also used experimental techniques to study resin .ow through dual pore .brous assemblies and determine the permeability with the help of a camera. XCT data-driven geometrical modeling was recently adopted to enhance the per-meability of fabric by introducing glass beads of different diameters and volume fractions (Vp) in between the .ber preform layers, which also enhances the mechanical properties. However, there is a critical size (100每200 米)and Vp = 10%, or optimum value (Fig. 
15c) below which, there is not much change in permeability, though the mechanical prop-erties 
increase 
compared 
to 
pristine 
fabric 
composite 
(Fig. 
15a). Above this value (Fig. 
15d) the mechanical properties decrease due to exces-sive out-of-plane tow bending and pore opening, although the perme-ability was increased. Such observations were made by Caglar et al. 
[208] using a laboratory XCT with the region of interest (ROI) of 1244 ℅ 1244 ℅ 304 voxels and smaller crop size of 304 ℅ 304 ℅ 304 voxels. 
Compared to experimental and analytical approaches, numerical ap-proaches are somewhat cheaper and require less time to calculate the permeability. The unit cell geometry for a numerical approach can be generated automatically (ideal approach) [209] or through XCT (realis-tic 
approach), 
using 
textile 
software 
packages 
[210], as mentioned ear-lier. The overall process, ranging from textile model creation to .ow simulation, requires little time (4.7 min or 282.37 s) for a woven roving of a single layer of E-glass fabric shown in Fig. 
16(a), which con.rms the advantage of the numerical approach over the experiment. 
As previously discussed, incomplete saturation of the micro-tows is the major drawback of 2D woven fabrics, due to their dual scale nature. As a result, there is a compromise between high permeability and .ber volume fraction (Eq. 1). However, permeability can be enhanced by the use of 3D fabrics. In contrast, the cost of 3D fabrics is high, and experi-mentally measuring the permeability is time-consuming and tedious, due 
to 
their 
complex 
geometry 
[212]. 
However, in recent times, there has been a growing interest in predicting the permeability of 3D fabrics using the hybrid approach, which is a combination of experimental and numerical approaches to create 3D fabric digital twins [16]. The hybrid approach requires XCT images as input to create the voxel geometry using software, such as Geodict, VoxTex, etc. and run the simulations using the same or any 
Fig. 14. XCT (left-hand side) and binary-converted (right-hand side) images indicating cross-section views of meso-channel shapes for different layers of G-ply fabric stack: (a, b) 4, (c, d) 5 and 
layers 
[197]. 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
(d) 400每800 米m[208]. 
other .ow analysis software, such as Fluent, Ansys/CFX, etc., with a CFD method [120]. Ali et al. [119] studied the in-plane permeability of 3D fabrics with different approaches, as shown in Fig. 
17(a, b), namely ex-perimental and hybrid modeling (XCT-numerical based). The hybrid method was performed in Math-to-Market's Geodict software, after creating the unit cell geometry in a digital twin format using XCT im-ages. The predicted permeability values from the hybrid approach agreed well with the experimental results. The permeability in the warp direction (K22) was found to be lower than in the weft direction (K11) in their case. 
4.1.3. Void characterization 
The formation of voids during the LCM process depends on several parameters, such as resin degassing procedure, volatiles in the resin, the .ow front velocity, mold clamping pressures, temperature, areal density of fabric and stacking sequence, resin viscosity, insuf.cient cur-ing, 
and 
surface 
tension, 
etc. 
[213]. The voids act as stress concentrations and crack initiators in the composite [214], causing the mechanical properties to reduce signi.cantly. The voids can be reduced by correctly 
Texle image 
positioning the injection and vent gates, degassing the resin before in-jection, increasing the packing pressure during curing, optimizing the .ow velocity, etc. [215,216]. 
Void formation between the tows and inside the tows in the LCM process was predicted 
by 
Park 
et 
al. 
[217] using theoretical modeling and simulations. These predictions were correlated with the experi-mental results from the literature [218], and good agreement was ob-tained. It was found that the void content relies not only on resin velocity but also on vacuum pressure. Further details regarding void size, 
shape, 
and 
distribution 
can 
be 
found 
in 
[219]. In general, optical mi-croscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and ultrasonic C-scan are widely used for characterizing void morphology in composites, since they are less expensive techniques [143,220每222]. However, as discussed earlier, the XCT gives better 3D information about voids than 2D imaging [14,55,124]. Suzuki et al. [223] introduced the dual-energy XCT concept for determining the size, shape, and distribution of voids in FRP composites. Nikishkov et al. [14] developed the density-based void contouring method to quantify the void dimensions (shape and porosity content) even in low contrast materials (e.g. 
Tex le Model Dry Fiber Mesh Compac on simula on Create Voxel Mesh 
Prepare Mesh Flow Simula ons 
(b) shows the step by step procedure for the permeability prediction of a single layer fabric unit cell. The textile model takes 2.77 s to run, followed by the dry .ber mesh creation phase (38. 8 s) using Texgen software after uploading the textile .le from Matlab. The compaction simulation can be performed in Abaqus software using a Python script. Following this, the voxel Mesh can be created using Matlab, and then the mesh size was reduced using Hyper Mesh software. Finally, .ow simulations can be performed using Ansys CFX software to predict the permeability with an overall computation time of 282.37 s. 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
(a) In-plane weft permeability (K11) (b) In-plane warp permeability (K22) 
carbon/epoxy) investigated by XCT. The robustness of this method was evident, which minimized the error in void estimation. The porosity maps can be obtained from XCT data visualization software packages such as VGStudio Max, Avizo, Simpleware, ImageJ, etc. [4], after reconstructing 
the 
XCT 
images 
in 
CT 
Pro 
[64] or Phoenix datos|x [2]. In particular, VGStudio Max and Avizo software packages offer great po-tential for segmentation, surface determination, and porosity/inclusion analysis of XCT images [224,225]. The voids in XCT images can also be segmented using a trainable segmentation tool known as Fiji [226]. 
XCT is not generally employed for tracking voids during the resin in-fusion process, owing to dif.culties (sample size restriction and high cost) associated with the in-situ setup. Little work has been performed on void characterization using in-situ XCT, except for a small number of papers [57每59,111]. However, the Synchrotron-Radiation Computed Laminography (SRCL) setup can be used to capture void generation and transportation, even in large-sized samples [227]. SRCL enables one to capture the images with different phase contrasts in different materials (e.g., air, .ber, resin, etc.) during resin in.ltration. However, the use of XCT has increased rapidly in efforts to identify and analyze both macro and micro-voids and their content in composites processed using LCM [62,228,229]. 
The transportation of voids in LCM relies on void size, shape, and lo-cation. The equivalent diameter (De) of each void is represented based on its area (A) which can be measured using ImageJ software or any other 
image 
analysis 
software 
packages 
and 
is 
given 
by 
[104,105]. 
r...... 
4A
De .e2T
羽 
The voids can be classi.ed in Eq. (2) 
as small (De b 50米m), medium (150 b De ≡ 50 米m) or large (De ≡ 150 米m) voids [48]. The void shape can be classi.ed as spherical or irregular. Spherical void shapes can be further classi.ed based on their shape roundness (Sr) which is de.ned as, 
De 2 
Sr .e3Tdmax 
where dmax is the maximum diameter of the void. Spherical voids can be categorized using Eq. (3) 
as circular (1 ≒ Sr N 0.9), elliptical 
(0.2 b Sr ≒ 0.9) or highly elongated (Sr ≒ 0.2). The assessment of voids using XCT can help to predict the failure region and enhance the resid-ual properties of the composite [60]. 
4.2. OoA processing using vacuum bag only (VBO) 
The placement of prepregs on the mold surface during VBO prepreg curing can be achieved in two ways: (i) Hand-layup (HLU) which is a method in which prepregs are placed manually and (ii) Automated Fiber Placement (AFP) and Automated Tape Laying (ATL) 每 in these two techniques, prepregs can be placed automatically and oriented as desired using a computer-controlled poly-articulated robot. AFP is used for placing narrow prepreg strips (width between 3.175 mm and 
12.175 mm) while ATL is used for placing wide prepreg tapes (width be-tween 75 mm and 350 mm) [249,260]. Stacked prepregs produced using HLU and automated techniques can be cured using a hot air oven. The maximum applied pressure possible in the case of VBO pre-pregs is 1 atm. The major difference between the consolidation process of VBO prepregs and autoclave prepregs is the applied pressure. The OoA VBO processing parameters, such as air permeability and the devel-opment of porosity/voids during and after processing, are discussed in Section 
5, along with the autoclave processing parameters. Also, Table 
2 
represents a comprehensive summary of the literature available on determining process parameters associated with OoA and autoclave techniques using XCT. 
5. Application of XCT based material models in autoclave processing 
It is well known that the void content in a component fabricated by autoclave molding is low, due to the high applied pressures as com-pared to that applied to OoA grade prepreg systems. However, OoA con-solidation of prepregs can produce void-free components (b 1%) 
[52], if the correct cure cycle and air evacuation procedures are adopted [261,262]. Moreover, the cost of autoclave-fabricated components using both HLU and automated prepreg placement techniques is signif-icantly higher when compared to OoA fabricated components [263]. Therefore, a comprehensive discussion of HLU and automated tech-niques in terms of cost, production time, and ef.ciency is necessary. Fig. 
18 
presents the product cost for fabricating two types of CFRP pre-pregs (intermediate modulus (IM) and high strength (HTA)) compos-ites manufactured by the autoclave process. From the .gure, it is clear that the labor and material costs (including material wastage) are high in the HLU process, while equipment costs (capital investment) are high in the automated (AFP and ATL) technique. The tooling cost (including cooling of the equipment) is almost the same in both cases. However, automated techniques offer the advantage that the material wastage and manpower are lower as compared to HLU. The ATL place-ment head cost is higher than the AFP head, as a consequence, the equipment and material costs associated with ATL is higher than AFP [260]. 
As compared to the HLU technique, AFP and ATL are widely used in high production industries due to their ability to reduce part cost, pro-duction time, [30] and yield a low void content in fabricated compo-nents [264]. In particular, ATL is used for manufacturing aircraft structural components, such as ribs, spars, I-beam stiffeners, etc. Though ATL is very effective in manufacturing large .at parts, it is dif.cult to use for manufacturing more complex geometries (double curvature sur-faces) such as wing spar C, fuselage barrels, engine cowls, etc. [249,265,266]. In contrast, AFP can be used for manufacturing complex-shaped components [267]. The layup rate for ATL is in the range of 25每50 kg/h for producing simple .at geometries [268]and 12 kg/h for manufacturing relatively complex pro.les [269]. In contrast to ATL, the layup rate for AFP is slow i.e., approximately 5.54 kg/h, which 

K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
Table 2 
Key process parameters in OoA and Autoclave using XCT, as reported in the literature. 
Manufacturing Technique Process parameters in OoA and Autoclave References 
Dry .ber compaction Prepreg compaction Permeability Air permeability Void formation and characterization 
Thompson et al. [117] Desplentere et al. [112] Naouar et al. [125]
can be attributed to predominantly accelerating/decelerating the head movement 
in 
curved 
surfaces 
or 
interfaces 
[270]. 
Although AFP and ATL techniques are widely used in high produc-tion applications, the challenges associated with these techniques such as, tow gaps and overlaps occurred in the part, which can be attrib-uted to .ber placement head movement/backlash, tow width varia-tions, dif.culties in steering the tows [249,260]. To overcome this, process parameters, such as lay-up temperature, compaction roller pressure, lay-up speed, etc., need to be studied with the use of in-situ defect monitoring NDT techniques. Further, the development of FEM-based XCT aided geometrical models of the material using images ex-tracted from the XCT is a topic of great interest, and can help in develop-ing cure simulation models of the complete cure cycle for understanding the material behavior at each stage during processing [271]. 
The curing behavior of prepregs can be often treated using two .ow models, namely, percolation [272] and shear stress models [273]. The resin .ows through the .ber bed in the former case, whereas both the resin and .bers .ow together in the latter case, as a result of deviatoric stresses. Percolation models are generally used for predicting the con-solidation behavior of thermoset prepregs, and shear .ow models are used 
to 
predict 
the 
curing 
behavior 
of 
thermoplastic 
prepregs 
[274,275]. 
It is important to consider the magnitude of the compaction force acting on the .ber bed and the .uid pressure during consolidation of FRP composites. Gutowski et al. [276] applied the effective stress theory developed by Terzhaghi [277] and Biot [278], to the consolidation of laminated composites using Eq. (4) 
[279], 
e4T
考a . 考 f t Presin 
where 考a and 考 f are the applied stress and .ber bed effective stress; Presin is the hydrostatic resin pressure. 
Therefore, to study autoclave and VBO prepreg curing processes, three characterization parameters, namely compaction, air permeability 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 

and porosity/void characteristics of prepregs can be determined through XCT characterization setups. 
5.1. Compaction of prepregs 
The prepreg compaction process is important for the consolidation of laminates fabricated using autoclave/VBO processes. Inter-ply and intra-ply porosities can be eliminated by reducing the thickness of the stack during the compaction process [250,280]. Wang and Gutowski 
[281] developed analytical models to remove gaps in a stack, based on an idealized geometry. However, removing the gaps is not suf.cient, since accounting for other defects associated with vacuum consolida-tion of prepreg is also important. Bleeding and squeezing effects are also important parameters to consider during compaction, which have asigni.cant impact on air permeability, as the through-thickness com-paction 
of 
prepregs 
dictates 
the 
part 
thickness 
. Belnoue et al. [249] deliberately created gaps and overlaps when laying down IM7/8552 prepreg using AFP and consolidated the prepreg stack under vacuum. The specimen geometry was then analyzed using XCT. The FEM geome-try was created using Abaqus and validated with the XCT geometry. The thickness variation and defect area predicted by the FEM model corre-lated well with the experiments. 
Fiber misalignment is a common cause of defects and occurs mainly during the compaction process due to applied pressure. The degree of .ber misalignment in carbon/epoxy prepreg laminates fabricated using ATL followed by the autoclave process was investigated by Nguyen et al. [258] with the help of XCT, and they found that the max-imum ply disorientation was approximately 1.2∼. The maximum in-plane .ber misalignment was in the range of 2∼每4∼, and the out-of-plane .ber misalignment was 1.25∼. The ImageJ software can be used to measure tow and .ber misalignments in a woven 
fabric 
[181] after curing. However, the degree of .ber misalignment can also be measured by performing in-situ compaction experiments using XCT. 
Similar to dry fabrics, the compaction response of prepregs follows a viscoelastic, non-linear, stress-strain relationship. Any increase in the compaction load leads to an increase in .ber volume fraction, which can be attributed to the domination of .ber bed compaction compared to resin [275]. Therefore, the compaction response of the un-cured pre-preg relies on the viscoelastic or inelastic properties (stress relaxation, creep, and cyclic properties), studying these properties is very impor-tant. In general, the viscoelastic or inelastic properties of the prepreg can be studied using a dynamic mechanical analyzer (DMA), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and a universal testing machine (UTM) [282每285]. The tracking of resin .ow is not possible with these instru-ments, which is a major drawback of these characterization techniques. In contrast, the overall process can be adequately characterized and vi-sualized with the aid of in-situ compaction using XCT, by incorporating a compaction .xture with an environmental chamber inside the XCT machine. 
There are challenges associated with studying the viscoelastic re-sponse of prepregs using in-situ XCT. The relaxation behavior of pre-pregs depends on temperature, .ber orientation or stacking sequence, rate effects, strain amplitude, sample size, frequency, etc. The stress re-laxation response of prepregs decreases with increasing temperature and decreasing % strain. Also, temperature has a signi.cant effect on the thickness of prepregs during stress relaxation tests [250]. Besides, unidirectional fabrics undergo higher compaction than cross-ply fabrics, which can be attributed to more friction between the .bers in the latter case 
[286]. Nevertheless, XCT can help to better understand rate effects in the compaction behavior of prepregs and associated parameters. 
To mimic the autoclave process, numerous compaction tests need to be performed at different pressures, therefore, un-interrupted in-situ XCT is ideal, but achieving good image contrast using LXCT is dif.cult, due to its high acquisition time and low .ux. On the other hand, performing such experiments using SXCT is very expensive, and there are sample size limitations. Further, SXCT may also damage the speci-men during continuous temporal studies, due to the high .ux. 
5.2. Air permeability through prepregs 
OoA/Autoclave prepregs can be fabricated by applying the resin .lm on both sides of the fabric, such that the dry fabric areas (partial impreg-nation) are maintained at the center in most of cases for removing the entrapped air during lay-up at room temperature. Air permeability is the primary parameter in prepregs that determines the component void content. Air permeability mainly depends on the degree of impreg-nation (DOI). The DOI is de.ned as the ratio between the .ber saturated volume to the total volume of the stack [61]. DOI can be measured by two methods; (i) manual method by performing the water pick-up test, and (ii) non-destructive testing (NDT) method with the help of two instruments, namely XCT and infrared (IR) thermography. Out of these two methods, the water pick-up test is the simplest and avoids the use of costly NDT instruments and post-processing tools. In this method, prepreg specimens are immersed in water; DOI is measured 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
based on the weight change of the specimen before and after immer-sion. Measured DOI based on the XCT approach using Otsu's method and water pick-up test correlates well than IR thermography based ap-proach [287]. 
The higher the degree of impregnation, the lower is the air perme-ability. As a result, the entrapped air locks within the plate. On the con-trary, the lower degree of impregnation results in unsaturated areas in the .ber bed, due to insuf.cient time to cover all areas before resin ge-lation 
[61]. Hence, there should be a balance between these two. How-ever, the latter is less cumbersome than the former, since it can be controlled by choosing a proper dwell time. 
Compaction pressure and temperature play a vital role in determin-ing the air permeability of prepregs. Determination of the air permeabil-ity is the .rst step for developing process models to predict the evacuation of entrapped air and the vacuum hold time [288]. Air perme-ability is higher at room temperature de-bulking, where the molecules in the resin are immobile in that state. However, the air permeability starts to decrease at elevated temperatures as the resin starts .lling the gaps due to the higher mobility of molecules at just slightly below or above the glass transition temperature (Tg). This can be attributed to a lower resin viscosity at this temperature. The .rst isothermal dwell period in a cure cycle is usually designed slightly below or above the Tg value of the resin for possible air removal from the compo-nent 
[243]. Further, any increase in temperature beyond the .rst dwell, the molecules again have become immobile due to resin starting to gel. However, there is no change in air permeability at the end of the curing process 
after 
resin 
gelation 
[289,290]. Xin et al. [291] compared the air permeability of prepregs fabricated through autoclave and VBO pro-cesses. It was found that the percentage of voids are independent of the air permeability in autoclave-fabricated parts, due to the high com-paction pressures. Conversely, entrapped air is naturally dif.cult to evacuate completely during debulking at 1 atm pressure in VBO pro-cessing prepregs. Therefore, voids in this process rely on the air perme-ability, particularly in the case of thick laminates. The lack of air permeability leads to a high void content in the VBO process. 
The falling pressure method has been used by a number of re-searchers [289,292] for measuring the in-plane and through-thickness air permeability of prepregs. In-plane air permeability can be measured using this method by using the vacuum bag consumables, mainly plac-ing the edge breathing dams around the prepreg stack to ensure air ex-traction in the in-plane direction and using a non-perforated release .lm to prevent air.ow in the through-thickness direction [288]. On the other hand, vacuum bag assembly, including the porous release ply or perforated release .lm, can be used to perform through-thickness air permeability experiments [240]. However, measuring the air permeability using the current experimental methods is time-consuming and labor-intensive. The movement of voids is challenging to track during the experiment. Instead, the uncured prepregs can be compacted dynamically using in-situ XCT. Further, voxel-based material modeling approaches can be developed by using XCT images of compacted uncured prepregs as an input in .ow simulation software, such as Geodict, VoxTex, etc., to predict the air permeability of prepregs. 
The air permeability of prepregs varies with .ber architecture and orientation effects. Kratz and Hubert [240] investigated the air permeability of three different OoA prepregs, these being unidirec-tional, plain weave, and satin weave, based on their porosity net-works and dry tow area using XCT. Out of three prepreg systems, the plain weave prepreg exhibited higher in-plane and transverse air permeabilities, owing to their high crimp, which can be attributed to the interlacement of every warp tow with a weft tow or vice-versa. In contrast, unidirectional prepregs do not possess any crimp, resulting in the lowest air permeability amongst the three prepregs. The interlayer air permeability of carbon/PEEK (AS4/ APC2) thermoplastic prepreg stacks based on different orientations, namely 0∼/0∼, 0∼/90∼ and 90∼/90∼ was studied using XCT by Zhang and Gillespie [293]. It was found that the air permeability was higher for the 0∼/0∼orientation (.bers and .ow direction are same) and least for 90∼/90∼ orientation. 
Moreover, it is well known that the transverse air permeability of prepregs is lower than the in-plane air permeability, due to the anisot-ropy of prepregs [294]. Several researchers [266,295,296]madeat-tempts to enhance the transverse air permeability of prepregs. As compared to continuous .lm prepreg, the semi-prepreg (partially resin-impregnated areas throughout the .ber bed surface) exhibit three orders of magnitude higher transverse air permeability [297]. This is because the volatiles can escape through the air evacuation chan-nels in the semi-prepreg. However, semi-prepreg materials require a low viscosity resin, due to the large dry areas. As a result, resin bleed out is dif.cult to control. 
Enhancing the transverse air permeability and reducing surface po-rosity issues in OoA, which are the major issues in woven prepregs, could be possible by using USCpreg, developed by the University of Southern California (USC) research group [298]. The USCpreg (Fig. 
19a) can be fabricated by creating dry gaps over the fabric using a pair of resin-coated rollers [299]; with this, through-thickness air transport is possible. Moreover, zero surface porosity and defect-free components are possible without the need for edge breathing dams. Fig. 
19(b) presents the through-thickness air permeability values for different prepregs, namely, control, one-sided, USCpreg and traditional VBO prepreg. It is clear from the .gure that the USCpreg exhibits a higher through-thickness air permeability, irrespective of the number of plies compared to the other prepregs. 
As with the USCpreg approach, a polymer .lm dewetting method 
enhances the transverse air permeability of the prepreg by dewetting the resin below the cure temperature on a substrate. It leads to a discontinuous resin pattern, which creates additional path-ways in the through-thickness direction for gases to evacuate, resulting in porosity-free laminates, even at low pressures associated with the VBO curing process. The transverse air permeability of dewetted pre-preg (Prepreg-104-120) was 36每52 times higher than that for the UD control prepreg. Therefore, the former exhibited only .ow-induced po-rosity (intra-ply voids), while the control prepreg exhibited both air (gas) induced (interply voids) and .ow-induced porosity, which can be seen in the XCT images in Fig. 
20. The intra-ply voids are due to in-complete wet-out, which can be attributed to the adoption of either im-proper cure cycle, i.e., an insuf.cient dwell time at low viscosity, or air that is not entirely removed between the .bers inside the tows during the initial stage. 
5.3. Void characterization in prepregs 
Void characterization is usually done at different stages of the manufacturing cycle to understand the effects of process conditions on the development and movement of the voids. Moreover, it is also very important to characterize the spatial distribution of voids in cured com-posites and to understand the performance of the manufactured part. The size and shape of voids depend on .ber architecture, type of resin used, and stacking sequence [300]. The void volume fraction (Vv)is a commonly-used void characterization parameter in FRP composites [261], which can be determined for layer-wise and global sample using VGStudio Max software, after post-processing XCT images [124,224,254]. The ability of VGStudio Max software to obtain layer-wise void distribution is highly valuable. 
Extensive studies have been performed on post-cured samples using XCT 
to 
characterize 
the 
presence 
of 
voids 
[14,132,244]. Detailed discus-sions on void characterization and its effect on the performance of the composites can be found in recent literature reviews [60,243]. Kastner et al. [301] studied different types of void content in carbon/epoxy pre-preg samples ranging from 1 to 10% by volume, using XCT. Spherical-shaped voids were found in samples having a void volume content of b3%, while .at-shaped voids were observed in samples with a void vol-ume content of above 3%. Such voids degrade the mechanical properties 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
(a) Manufacturing process of USCpreg (b) Through-thickness air permeability 
of composites and reduce component ef.ciency. The effect of voids on the mechanical property degradation of autoclave fabricated compos-ites has been studied by many researchers [124,132,253,302,303] using XCT. Tserpes et al. [252] developed a progressive damage model based on data obtained from XCT scans to analyze the effect of void con-tent effect on the transverse tensile properties of carbon/epoxy prepreg composites fabricated using the autoclave process. The results highlighted a small decrease in stiffness, and a signi.cant decrease in tensile strength, as the void content increases from 1.56% to 3.43%. 
In general, four possible causes of void formation in prepregs are: 
(i) 
air entrapment between or in .ber tows during prepreg manufactur-ing, (ii) moisture absorption in the prepreg during storage, (iii) air en-trapment between the plies during lay-up, and (iv) volatiles generated during resin cure [36,304,305]. Approaches to minimize issues (ii) to 
(iv) 
during prepreg manufacturing are discussed below. 
Absorbed moisture can be predicted using a diffusion-based void model [306] and removed by optimizing the effect of prepreg out time [261]. Void growth takes place only when the concentration of moisture in the resin (Cresin) is higher than the concentration of moisture at the void surface (Cvoid). The parameter Cvoid is directly proportional to the square of the pressure [261,307]. Therefore, void growth would not take place during autoclave consolidation of prepregs, due to their high operating pressures, when compared to the VBO consolidation of prepregs. Air entrapment can be eliminated by choosing an optimum DOI during prepreg production and interrupted debulking during lay-up, 
which 
relies 
on 
the 
thickness 
of 
the 
plate 
[308,309]. However, com-plete void removal is not possible at room temperature; for that, under-standing the effect of heating rate, degree of cure, resin viscosity, applied pressure, temperature ramp, dwell time, and post-cure time on cure cycle is important. In particular, choosing the appropriate dwell temperature is essential to enable resin .ow into the porous areas 
[310]. 
These 
details 
can 
be 
found 
in 
[311]. The cure cycle is usually designed in such a way that a lower resin viscosity and, therefore, a lower degree of cure are maintained until the end of the .rst dwell cycle for possible void transport [243]. The resin viscosity can be mea-sured using a rheometer, whereas the degree of cure (汐) can be mea-sured using differential scanning calorimetry. These are given by [312,313], 
G0 iG}
米 .e5T
肋 
忖Hresidual 
汐 . 1. e6T
忖Htotal 
Prepreg type  2D Visualization  3D Visualization  
Control Prepreg  
Prepreg 104-120  
Fig. 20. Visualization of microstructure in 2D and 3D for different UD prepregs treated with ammonia using XCT prior to cure 
[238].                          
where 米 . is the complex viscosity; G∩ and G" are the storage and loss moduli, respectively; 肋 is the angular frequency; 忖Hresidual and 忖Htotal are the residual and total reaction heat, respectively. 
The effect of these parameters can be studied on un-cured prepregs at different pressures and temperatures by performing in-situ experi-ments using XCT to mimic the complete cure cycle. For example, the vacuum bag mold closing process can be replicated by performing com-paction and stress-relaxation experiments while the dwelling process can be mimicked by performing compaction creep experiments. The consideration of residual stress/strain before designing the cure cycle is also essential, since these properties can be affected by the aforemen-tioned 
cure 
cycle 
parameters 
[314]. 
XCT is a promising tool for measuring all four possible ways of voids discussed above. However, the in-situ XCT can be effectively used only to monitor the fourth possible void type during composite laminate cur-ing. Plessix et al. [255] performed in-situ ultra-fast SXCT experiments to study the porosity behavior of carbon/epoxy prepregs by varying the pressure to replicate the autoclave cure process. They used two cure cy-cles with one of them, similar to the OoA prepreg process performed at a constant pressure of 0.1 MPa, and the other is shown in Fig. 
21(d). The dramatic decrease in void content with the increase in pressure from 
0.1 MPa to 0.8 MPa is evident in Fig. 
21(b). The void content increases again when the pressure decreases from 0.8 MPa to 0.1 MPa (Fig. 
21c). These results emphasize the value of using XCT for in-situ real-time monitoring of the voids in laminates. 
Post-cured laminates generally contain two types of porosity: 
(i) surface porosity and (ii) internal porosity. The reason for the forma-tion of these porosities and possible ways to minimize or eliminate them during the consolidation of the composite from placing the pre-preg on the mold surface to the end of the composite curing process are discussed below. 
5.3.1. Surface porosity 
Air entrapment between the interface of the .rst prepreg ply and the mold surface causes surface porosity. There are several parameters, such as prepreg out-time, freezing, and process effects, which cause surface porosity. Amongst these, vacuum hold time plays an important role in determining the level of surface porosity, since longer vacuum hold time gives lower levels of porosity. Details about these effects are re-ported in [315]. However, the effect of surface porosity on the structural capability of a component is less compared to internal porosity, al-though it reduces the aesthetic appearance of the product. Conse-quently, it may result in the extra costs for the surface .nishing of the component. These surface porosities can be estimated and then mini-mized using statistical analysis tools and with the help of VGStudio Max software, after reconstructing the XCT images [124,225]. 
Extensive surface porosity in woven prepreg components leads to surface roughness (58.6 米m). In contrast, UD prepregs typically exhibit a smooth surface (12.7 米m). This is attributed to different .ber architec-tures of the woven and UD prepregs [316]. The weaving patterns of woven fabrics are such that there are regions (overlaps and underlaps) for easy air entrapment; this phenomenon has been studied using XCT [240]. Surface porosity in woven prepregs can be minimized using a sil-icone rubber contoured roller instead of a conventional hard rubber roller 
At the same time, this porosity can be entirely eliminated by 
the 
usage 
of 
USCpreg, 
as 
discussed 
earlier 
[299]. 
5.3.2. Internal porosity 
Unlike surface porosity, internal porosity occurs between adjacent plies and .ber tows. Centea and Hubert developed a representa-tive model to predict tow impregnation and validated the model with the results from scanned prepreg samples using XCT. It was reported that if the cure cycle involves a high initial resin degree of cure and a low temperature, .ow-induced voids can occurr, particularly for tows with more circular geometries (high .ber volume fraction) due to the long tow .ow region. Voids between .ber tows as a function of prepreg out time were studied using XCT by Grunenfelder et al. [246]. They found that the .ber tow porosity of a prepreg increases, as the room temperature aging time increases than the prepreg stated out life ac-cording to the manufacturer datasheet. Besides, such porosity remains in the .ber tow when using a high degree of cure resin. The internal po-rosity degrades the mechanical properties of the component. Therefore, understanding resin cure kinetics and rheology is important when try-ing to eliminate internal porosity. 
5.3.2.1. Resin cure kinetics and rheology. OoA prepreg processing requires a long cure cycle to ensure that the resulting properties are equivalent to autoclave quality. This is due to the fact that a lower consolidation pres-sure is applied [318]. However, it is clearly desirable to reduce the manufacturing time without compromising the product quality when using OoA resins. These resins should normally react (high viscosity) at room temperature for the air evacuation channels remain open and to prevent ※cold .ow,§ on the other hand, these should have low viscos-ity and less volatile generation at elevated temperatures for complete saturation of the porous areas before gelation and .nal cure. ※Cold .ow§ is also induced by long debulking cycles, which leads to intra-tow voids [304]. However, it is clear from the XCT images that one hour debulking signi.cantly reduces the presence of inter-ply voids in prepregs compared to samples without any vacuum hold, as indicated in Fig. 
22 
[244]. The inter-ply voids are represented by a gray color. This decrease is attributed to tow nesting and ply adhesion, due to compaction. 
To date, the majority of resins used in aerospace-grade prepregs are toughened epoxy resins [284], which induce exothermic reactions at high temperatures. Consequently, localized heat (thermal overshoot) occurs in the center of the laminate, or where the thickness of the lam-inate is high [319]. Besides, there is a tendency for components to fail catastrophically owing to less impact energy of aerospace-grade epoxy resins compared to thermoplastic polymers. Therefore, researchers should focus on other resin systems as well, to overcome this. Prepregs manufactured based on a hybrid resin (thermoset and thermoplastic) system possess excellent impact energy compared to thermoset pre-pregs [320]. 
The bleeder geometry also determines the resin volume fraction in a laminate, which possesses a signi.cant effect on the cure cycle. The in-.uence of pore gaps in the bleeder, and its thickness on the degree of cure, and thermal overshoot of graphite/epoxy prepreg composites was studied by Ganapathi et al. [321]. A thin bleeder generally has fewer pores and absorbs less resin, which exhibit a high thermal over-shoot at the center of the laminate while the thick bleeders cause lower thermal overshoot and delay the degree of cure. For further de-tails about the voids induced by the thermal gradients during prepreg consolidation 
studied 
using 
XCT, 
is 
given 
elsewhere 
[239]. An decrease in void content with increasing temperature from 30 ∼C to 90 ∼C during the consolidation of aerospace-grade prepreg systems (Hexcel) was found using XCT, coupled 
with 
VGStudio 
Max 
software 
[224]. 
5.3.3. Effect of cure cycle on void formation/removal 
The entrapment of voids in the micro and macro-regions of a com-posite are dif.cult to control. These parameters rely on the compaction mechanism 
(room 
temperature 
vacuum 
hold) 
and 
the 
cure 
cycle 
[305]. A comparison of interply and intraply voids for different cured condi-tioned laminates (fresh, t1,t2,t3,t4, and cured) by hand-layup and auto-mated .ber placement (AFP) is shown in Fig. 
23 
[243]. It can be seen from the .gure that most of the voids in the fresh state are intraply voids, due to the air evacuation channels in both HLU and AFP. These intraply voids are completely removed after the .rst ramp (t1) in AFP processing and after .rst dwell (t2) in HLU. Most of the interply voids are eliminated after the .rst dwell phase in AFP while the interply voids are removed after the .rst dwell in HLU, though complete interply void removal is not possible. The resin starts gelling after the .rst dwell; therefore no residual voids can be removed after this stage [322]. The 
(a) No vacuum hold (b) 1 hour vacuum hold 
increase in interply voids after t2 in both AFP and HLU is due to a change in pressure. Therefore, changing the pressure after the .rst dwell is not desirable in the OoA process. The overall void content is lower in the case of AFP than in HLU, though the intraply void content in the fresh state is slightly higher for AFP (6.01%). Hence, it emphasizes the robust-ness of AFP over HLU. 
Fig. 
24(a) shows the void spatial distribution in unidirectional car-bon/epoxy prepreg laminates fabricated according to four different cur-ing cycles. Fig. 
24(b) shows the rod-like structure, which includes the coalescence of voids along the .ber direction (Z-axis) [313], since the air permeability is higher in the .ber direction relative to perpendicular to the .ber direction [323]. Amongst these four laminates, LAM-C2 (Fig. 
24a) is optimum in terms of achieving a low void volume fraction (Vv = 0.4%), due to maintaining a lower viscosity for a longer time, be-fore resin gelation. However, the time available for void suppression or mitigation in LAM-C1 is less, due to the higher viscosities that lead to a higher Vv (2.9%), compared to the other laminates. However, the resid-ual porosity (1.1%) is lower in LAM-C3 compared to LAM-C1 and LAM-C0 (Vv = 2.7%), due to higher .rst dwell (130 ∼C) after the initial .ash. The void content in LAM-C1 can be reduced by varying the pres-sure instead of maintaining it constant and reducing the initial dwell temperature, which is equivalent to LAM\\C2. 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
The XCT is a powerful tool for analyzing voids, not only in thermoset leads to higher levels of void formation (Vv = 3.81%). On the other prepreg composites but also in thermoplastic prepreg composites. In hand, no voids were present when the laminate edges are open to vac-contrast to thermoset prepregs, the void characterization of thermo-uum [236]. plastic prepregs mainly relies on (i) through-thickness air diffusion and (ii) a combination of air diffusion to a single layer and through the permeable interlayer regions. Such void reduction mechanisms in 6. Future directions carbon/poly-ether-ether-ketone (PEEK) composites can be seen in the XCT images in Fig. 
25. It is clear from the .gure that through-thickness XCT studies are useful in designing and developing material models/ air diffusion only occurs when the laminate edges are sealed, which twins for manufacturing advanced aerospace composite structures. 
(a) 72-layer with edge sealed  (b) 72-layer with perimeter open to vacuum  
3D volume  Voids in sample  3D volume  Voids in sample  
Fig. 25. Void distribution in Carbon/PEEK composites: (a) Edge sealed and (b) Perimeter open to vacuum 
[236]. 
K. Naresh et al. / Materials and Design 190 (2020) 108553 
However, there are speci.c challenges that need to be addressed during composites manufacturing and modeling, which are discussed below. 
Several XCT parameters during image acquisition and post-processing parameters (including reconstruction, voxel geometry crea-tion, and analysis, segmentation) need to be optimized, given that they play a vital role in accurate process characterization and modeling. Moreover, these XCT based approaches deal with mesoscale geometries based on RVE. XCT-aided material modeling approaches for under-standing the process behavior of macroscale geometries are very lim-ited, owing to dif.culties in achieving a high resolution and the high computational cost. As a result, it is challenging to mimic the exact pro-cess behavior of real structures. The following lists further areas of im-provement and potential future directions. 
Further studies are required to explore several in-situ XCT set-up to continuously monitor .ow in three dimensions and generate the as-sociated numerical models. 
Creep compaction studies using XCT to characterize un-cured pre-pregs at different rates of loading and temperatures. 
Further studies on hybrid prepregs using in-situ XCT are also needed to clearly understand temperature and pressure effects. 
The microstructural variation of .ber tows and ply distortion charac-teristics, resin bleed void coalescence, and their movement during dif-ferent stages of creep can be investigated with the help of XCT. 
A combination of arti.cial intelligence (AI) tools and XCT technology can resolve issues associated with handling big data during compos-ites characterization and process modeling. 
7. Conclusions 
In this review, procedures for improving different characterization stages of aerospace composites manufacturing processes using XCT generated material models have been discussed. The review demon-strates that modern XCT equipment and procedures can provide useful information about reinforcing fabrics and prepregs during process char-acterization that can potentially reduce the number of experiments, time, and manpower. The in.uence of XCT parameters on image quality during scanning and post-processing, including data enhancement for reconstruction and voxel geometry creation, has been reviewed. The computation procedure based on reinforcement image segmentation and boundary condition assignment for simulations has also been discussed in detail. The limitations of meso models over the meso-macro and macro models and vice versa have been highlighted. Under-standing the effect of nesting during compaction on single and multi-layer dry fabrics using XCT for LCM characterization has been shown to be useful for predicting mold clamping forces and the .nal part thick-ness. A comparison of different CFD approaches with analytical and XCT based hybrid methods for predicting reinforcement permeability has also been reviewed in detail. A review of literature has highlighted promising results can be obtained from XCT based material models, suc-cessfully predicting the permeability of several types of reinforcement. The effective cure cycle design procedures for VBO prepregs and auto-clave techniques based on optimization of several processing parame-ters (debulking time, heating rate, degree of cure, dwell period, etc.) showed that void generation and mitigation can be better understood using XCT-based models. The technical aspects required to enhance the through-thickness air permeability and the void reduction mecha-nisms in both the thermoset and thermoplastic prepregs have been rig-orously reviewed. 
Recent developments in aerospace manufacturing techniques coupled with advances in the modeling approach through the use of XCT and commercial FEM and CFD software packages were discussed in this study. These show that XCT based material models will help de-sign better materials for the next generation aerospace components. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
K. Naresh:Writing -original draft, Software, Validation, Formal anal-ysis, Visualization, Investigation, Resources.K.A. Khan:Conceptualiza-tion, Methodology, Data curation, Writing -review & editing, Visualization, Resources, Investigation, Supervision, Project administra-tion, Funding acquisition.R. Umer:Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Writing -review & editing, Resources, Visualization, In-vestigation.W.J. Cantwell:Resources, Writing -review & editing. 
Acknowledgment 
This publication is based on work supported by the Khalifa Univer-sity of Science and Technology under Award No. CIRA-2018-15. 

1. Introduction 
Current trends in composite manufacturing technologies for the aerospace industry are focussed on the automatic deposition of composite tapes and new multi-component materials systems, such as toughened prepregs, for improved component perfor-mance, damage tolerance or added functionality. The automation and material technologies enabling these advances have pro-gressed much further than the capability to understand, predict, and optimise the manufacturing processes [1,2]. As a result, even though automatic .bre deposition technologies promise higher manufacturing rates, in practice lack of understanding of the pre-preg behaviour often leads to limited improvement in laydown rates. The complexities in processing present a high risk of defect generation and requires substantial investments in empirical optimisation. 
Two of the main technologies for automated deposition of pre-preg material are Automated Tape Laying (ATL) and Automated Fibre Placement (AFP) [3每5]. The two techniques use very similar machines, consisting of a computer-controlled poly-articulated robot, with a placement head that lays bands of prepreg strips onto a mould in order to construct the layup (Fig. 
1). ATL is employed to 
. Corresponding author. E-mail address: jonathan.belnoue@bristol.ac.uk 
(J.P.-H. Belnoue). 
deliver wide prepreg tapes onto a surface whilst automatically removing the ply backing and is well adapted for the manufactur-ing of large parts of relatively simple geometry, e.g. an aircraft wing skin. AFP is similar to ATL but utilises narrow prepreg strips 
(the width of which can vary from 18 to 12 ), which are collimated on the head and then delivered together. As narrower tapes can steer over sharply curved surfaces better than wider tapes (that cannot be placed without buckling some of the .bres), AFP can be used to manufacture much more complex geometries e.g. wing spar C sections. In order to obtain good layup quality, it is essential to control all the process parameters (heating temperature, com-paction pressure, placement speed, etc) [6每10] 
and the machine trajectories. Over the years, design rules have been implemented to optimise these trajectories for maximum .nal mechanical prop-erties (stiffness and strength) of the component being constructed [11,12]. This is, however, insuf.cient to ensure the production of defect free components as the tolerance in the .bre placement head movement, steered .bres, and tow width variation all con-tribute to the introduction of gaps and overlaps within the lami-nate [3,13]. In addition, the optimisation process of the machine trajectory can itself be responsible for the introduction of further defects. What is not often taken into account in manufacturing practices and analysis of such defects is that the in.uence on .nal .bre path and ply geometry from gaps and overlaps is not their nominal as-deposited position, but a function of what happens to 
1359-835X/ 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Fig. 1. (a) An AFP machine laying into a female mould [3] 
每 (b) Automated .bre placement head, redrawn from [11]. 
Unlabelled image
the laminate in the subsequent processes, such as debulking or consolidation. The through-thickness deformation of the laminate with the gaps or overlapping tapes may lead to an additional .bre crimp or wrinkles, which can have a major impact on composite properties. 
In recent years there have been a number of experimental and numerical studies carried out to predict and characterise the knockdown effect of gaps and overlaps on .nal mechanical proper-ties of components manufactured by AFP. Amongst others, Sawicki and Minguet [14] 
have shown the reduction of compressive strength of samples with various distributions and sizes of gaps in 90 plies; Turoski [15] 
studied the knockdown effect under both tensile and compressive loading of isolated and interacting gaps with different stagger repeats; Croft et al. [16] 
investigated the effect of tensile, compressive and in-plane shear loading on the strength of laminates with a gap, an overlap and a half gap/overlap embedded in the through-thickness symmetry plane; and Elsher-bini and Hoa [17] 
showed similar trends with respect to fatigue loading. More recently, Li et al. [18] 
generated sophisticated mesh-ing tools which allowed them to easily create a series of .nite ele-ment models with various combinations and permutations of gaps and overlaps. They were, then, able to systematically investigate the in.uence of defect size and distribution on the strength knock-down of the modelled specimens. The main conclusion of all these studies was that the introduction of gaps and overlaps during the layup process results (after consolidation and curing of the lami-nate) in the introduction of out-of-plane waviness of the load bear-ing 0 plies (i.e. wrinkles) adjacent to the gapped or overlapped layers and to local thickness variation which, in turn, are responsi-ble for the decreased mechanical properties. This was later con-.rmed by Lan et al. [19,20] 
who showed that the use of a caul plate favours resin .ow thus leading to reduced thickness variation and improved mechanical properties. 
To limit the variation in strength of composite components made by automated manufacturing, it is absolutely imperative to establish more clearly how wrinkle severity and thickness varia-tion can be reduced and, in the best case scenario, mitigate against it. With application to ATL of thermoplastic-based systems, Wang and Gutowski [21] 
studied analytically the possibility to remove (through processing) gaps and laps embedded in a lay-up. Although these studies were very informative, the authors only considered a very idealised geometry where the overlaps were described as cubical blocks of material superimposed with each other. Moreover, the evolution under processing conditions of only one embedded defect (i.e. one gap or one overlap) was considered. A real component manufactured by AFP, however, contains a very large number of different and complex combinations and permuta-tions for gaps and overlaps, which can be of different sizes. A full exploration of the possibility to mitigate, through processing, defects in realistic engineering structure laid-up by AFP would therefore necessitate a very large and costly test plan. In compar-ison, composite process modelling offers the possibility to test a much larger range of possible combinations in a virtual sense and to optimise the processing parameters in order to minimise the defect sizes in a cured component. Process modelling could also advantageously replace or at least reduce empirical methods 
and imaging techniques (which necessitates specimen/com-ponent manufacture) [22,23] 
for the generation of the internal ply geometry that is used as input to failure models. This would open the way for a fully virtual optimisation and strength predic-tion tool for composite components produced by AFP. 
Most of the models available in the literature for the .ow of resin in beds of reinforcement are based on Darcy＊s law [24,25]. These methods work very well to describe the evolution of the average thickness and .bre volume fraction in a large piece of pre-preg when the edge effects can be neglected [26每29]. The principal modelling assumption is that bleeding .ow (i.e. the pressure gradi-ent causes resin .ow relative to the .bre) is the main mechanism leading to the thickness variation of the laminate when processed. This is however not always fully representative as it has been known for a number of years [30] 
that squeezing .ow (i.e. the lam-inate behaves as a highly viscous incompressible .uid) can also occur. Recently, Nixon-Pearson et al. [31] 
have shown that this can greatly affect the deformability of toughened thermoset pre-preg under compaction. They highlighted that the smaller a pre-preg volume with unconstrained boundaries (external or internal as in the case of tapes with gaps), the bigger the effect of squeezing .ow on thickness evolution. This is important for the study of the consolidation of laminate produced by AFP as unconstrained nar-row strips of prepreg and gapped and overlapped regions can locally affect the tape thickness to width ratio. This has been shown [31] 
to greatly in.uence the deformability of prepreg stacks. Hence, numerical tools for consolidation-induced deforma-tion of laminate produced by AFP need to be able to capture these phenomena. The model recently proposed by Belnoue et al. [32] 
takes account of both bleeding and squeezing .ow. It was shown to predict accurately the evolution of thickness and width over time of laminates subjected to complex pressure and pressure rate cycles. It is also able to capture some of the interesting experimen-tally observed effects [31] 
such as the convergence to a compaction limit at high temperature and high pressure or the size effects observed in the through-thickness and transverse deformation of prepreg stacks under compaction. 
The aim of the present study is to gain a better understanding of the way gaps and overlaps, which are introduced during auto-mated prepreg layup, evolve during processing and promote the development of .bre path defects and thickness variation. As in-situ testing and observation of the evolution of the ply structure in the course of processing is not possible, another advantage of the modelling is that it gives information on how the plies move in relation to each other during the layup consolidation and resin cure. In the .rst part of this paper the model for the consolidation of toughened prepreg under processing conditions [32] 
is coupled to an existing cure simulation model, which allows to describe the full cure cycle. Validation of the updated models is given for struc-turally simple but internally complex test cases, comparing .nite element (FE) predictions with experimental data. The second part of the paper focuses more closely on the processing of gaps and overlaps introduced during the layup process. 
2. Modelling tools 
The main novelty of the modelling approach is the use of the consolidation model for toughened prepreg presented in Belnoue et al. [32]. In order to be able to model the full cure cycle, the con-solidation model is here coupled to cure simulation models that are well established in the literature [33,34]. The models are brie.y summarized separately before their combination is presented in Section 2.3. The framework is then validated by simple test cases. The full list of the material parameters used throughout the study can be found at https://data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/x9rik93lx3tp 
1yeup4pe8kbti. 
2.1. Consolidation model 
The .ow-compaction model used here follows directly from Belnoue et al. [32] 
where more details are given. Only the main model assumptions and equations are summarised. One of the model＊s main feature is that it is capable of accounting for both squeezing and bleeding .ow. This is important for the modelling of toughened prepreg as they have been shown [31] 
to exhibit hybrid behavior between what would be expected from a thermo-plastic based prepreg system (e.g. the variation of the material response with the tape width and thickness) and what is usually observed for thermosetting systems (e.g. the existence of a com-paction limit). 
The model uses the general thermodynamical framework pro-posed by Limbert and Middleton [35] 
for transversely isotropic solids. Although the framework was .rst formulated for the descrip-tion of soft biological tissues (muscles), it is very relevant for the description of uncured prepreg as both materials are highly viscous and present one strong direction of anisotropy. It is assumed that the general thermodynamic potential, w, is additively decomposed into an elastic part (w e which is related here to the deformation of .bres) 
and a viscous part (w related to the .ow of matrix). Noting C the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, we can then express the second the Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor as: 
where C denotes the derivative of C with respect to the time. 
The expression of the elastic potential follows from Bonet and Burton [10]. 
where 1 is the second-order unit tensor, I1 .1 : C, 
The material parameters a, b, k, lT and lL in Eq. (2) 
can all be expressed as a function of the engineering constants. N0 is the structural tensor which characterizes the local directional proper-ties of the material and is de.ned as N0 .n0 n0 (where n0 is the .bre orientation). 
The expression for w follows from a phenomenological model proposed in [32] 
which builds on the work by Rogers [36] 
and Kelly [37]. Based on experimental results, the existence of a transition mechanism between squeezing (typically at low temperature and low pressure) and bleeding .ow was postulated. This transition mechanism was thought to be related to what many authors have described in the past as locking, which corresponds to the point in time when the .bre bed reaches a con.guration that is such that it cannot deform transverse to the .bres and transverse to the load-ing direction anymore. It was further assumed that after locking a change of direction of the resin .ow between the .bres takes place, from transverse squeezing to bleeding. To ensure a smooth transi-tion between the two mechanisms, squeezing .ow theories were used in both cases. In other words, bleeding was mathematically represented as squeezing along the .bres. 
Another consequence of this idealisation was that, unlike tradi-tional .ow models for thermosets prepreg which use Darcy＊s .ow, the model assumed that the apparent viscosity of a piece of pre-preg subjected to pure compressive loading could be multiplica-tively decomposed into the product of a strain rate dependent term (assumed to behave as power law .uid) and a strain depen-dent term [37]. 
To capture the deformation of a prepregs with an anisotropic Stokes .ow, a model would have to be de.ned at sub-ply resolu-tion and a .ne mesh through thickness of the plies would have to be used [31,38]. This is not practical for the simulation at a com-ponent scale. To overcome this dif.culty a multiscale approach was used. As a result, the strain dependent term was further mul-tiplicative decomposed into a component pertaining to the macro-scale deformation of the tape and a term (at the micro scale) expressing the evolution the inter-.bre channels. All this develop-
ment .nally leads to the formulation of two expressions for w . Prior to locking, the transverse behavior of the material is con-
trolled by the viscous potential given in Eq. (3). After locking, w is expressed as in Eq. (4). In both these equations, J2 is the strain 
rate invariant de.ned as J2 .12 e1 : C2T. 
and 
are known a priori as they are linked to the geometry of the tape and of the unit cell. l0, w0 and h0 are the initial tape length (i.e. along the .bre direction), width and thickness respectively. Whilst vl and vf are the aspect ratios of a unit cell at locking and at the compaction limit respectively and d is the size of the .bres in the plane perpendicular to the .bre direction. Therefore, one of the most elegant aspects of the model is that it can describe the transverse behaviour of prepreg under processing conditions at constant temperature with 3 parameters only. The parameters a and b are two power law parameters con-trolling the behaviour of the rate dependent term of the apparent viscosity whilst the parameter k controls the size of the inter-.bre channels at the micro-scale. As shown in [32], these parame-ters can be easily determined by .tting straight lines through experimental data on a log每log plot of simple compaction tests performed on cruciform shaped samples. 
2.2. Cure simulation model 
A cure simulation model was developed and implemented using the commercial Finite Element Analysis code Abaqus/Stan-dard. The simulation addresses the heat transfer effects occurring during the cure process and allows for quanti.cation of the tem-perature and degree of cure evolution of the manufactured part. The model is three-dimensional and transient and has been applied to the Hexcel IM7/8552 prepreg material used in this study. The material properties depend on both the degree of cure and temper-ature and the material sub-models of cure kinetics, thermal con-ductivity and speci.c heat capacity were implemented in the user de.ned subroutine UMATHT. The heat transfer solution appropriate for simulating the cure process can be expressed by a three-dimensional energy balance combined with Fourier＊s heat conduction law and incorporating the exothermic heat generated due to the chemical reaction of the resin as follows [39]: 
@Ter; TT da 
qcp .r KrTer; TTtvr q HT e5T 
@t rdt 
Here q and cp are the density and the speci.c heat capacity of the composite, respectively, K is the thermal conductivity tensor, T the temperature, t and r the time and spatial coordinate and a the degree of cure. The rate of heat generation due to cure is expressed as the product of the resin volume fraction vr , the den-sity of the resin q , the total heat of reaction HT and the cure reac-
tion rate da=dt. 
The cure kinetics model used for the resin system of this study is a combination of a nth order model and an autocatalytic model [34]. The speci.c heat capacity is de.ned based on the rule of mix-tures for the relevant volume fraction of .bres and matrix whilst a geometry-based model is implemented to compute the thermal conductivity [34]. The .bres＊ speci.c heat capacity and thermal conductivity present a linear dependence on temperature [33], whilst the resin speci.c heat capacity and thermal conductivity depend on both degree of cure and temperature [34]. 
2.3. Thermo-mechanical model 
A coupled three-dimensional transient thermo-mechanical model was developed by coupling the consolidation model and the cure simulation model presented in Sections 2.1 
and 
2.2. Again, the coupled model was developed within the implicit FE package Abaqus/Standard. A staggered solution approach is adopted (see Fig. 
2). The heat transfer analysis is carried out .rst, followed by the mechanical analysis. As described in Section 2.2 
the heat trans-fer solution is coded within a UMATHT subroutine yielding the evolution of temperature and degree of cure of the laminate. This information is then passed to a UMAT subroutine where the mechanical model described in Section 2.1 
is coded. The coupling between the heat transfer solution and the consolidation model is carried out by expressing the consolidation phenomenological parameters a; b and k as a function of temperature [32]. The ther-mal and chemical strains occurring during the process cycle are taken into account by considering the thermal expansion [40] 
and cure shrinkage coef.cients [41] 
of the material. In addition, the fact that consolidation stops at gelation, is deployed numeri-cally by assigning a very large apparent viscosity gapp after the 
resin gels, i.e. when the instantaneous degree of cure a reaches the degree of cure at gelation agel. The degree of cure at gelation agel for the resin system of this study is 0.33 [41]. 
2.4. Model validation 
2.4.1. Cure simulation model validation 
To validate the cure simulation model, an 18 mm thick .at panel was cured within an autoclave. The .at panel was placed on a 10 mm aluminium tooling plate, bagged up and sealed before testing. A K-type thermocouple was mounted at the centre of the laminate in order to record the temperature evolution of the lam-inate during the process. The nominal cure pro.le [42] 
of the 8552 resin system was applied whilst the lay-up of the laminate was [0/90]37s. The cure of an 18 mm thick .at panel was then modelled using the developed cure simulation model and the results were compared with the experimental data. The widely accepted mate-rial properties of aluminium were applied to the tool. Hence, the thermal conductivity and the speci.c heat capacity were set at 120 [W/m/.C] and 960 [J/kg/.C], respectively, whereas the density was .xed at 2700 kg/m3. The heat convection coef.cients for the given autoclave were determined experimentally using lumped mass thermal analysis. It was shown that the heat convection coef-.cients of the top and bottom surfaces were 27.3 and 31.7 [W/m2/ K], respectively. In addition, adiabatic conditions were applied at the lateral walls of the laminate assuming no heat loss due to the high width to thickness ratio. 
Fig. 
3 
presents the temperature evolution and the degree of cure at the centre of the laminate. As it can been seen there is a very good agreement between the experimental data and simulation results implying that the cure simulation model developed is able to simulate the heat transfer phenomena occurring during the cure process of the material system of this study successfully. The tem-perature lag between the centre of the laminate and the autoclave air is due to the heat convection between the autoclave and the 
200 
1 applied pressure. Fig. 
5a depicts the heat transfer results for the two case studies. The evolution of both the degree of cure and tem-
180 
0.9 
perature is identical between the two con.gurations since the lay-
160 
0.8 up does not affect the heat transfer in the through-the thickness 140 
0.7 direction. In addition, there is no temperature and degree of cure 
Temperature at centre of laminate - experiment Autoclave air -experiment Temperature at centre of laminate - simula on Degree of cure at centre of laminate - simula on  
Temperature [C] 
Degreee of cure 
distribution within the laminates due to the fact that the laminates 
are relatively thin (2 mm). Furthermore, there is no heat loss 
between the hot plates and the laminates since they are in direct 
contact. In the beginning of the cycle consolidation effects domi-
nate, leading to a considerable thickness reduction until the thick-
ness reaches a plateau at the middle of the second ramp where the 
resin has gelled and cure shrinkage strains start to develop. This 
phenomenon is accurately captured by the model since the degree 
shown in Fig. 
5a. The increase of temperature during the second 
ramp results in a slight increase in thickness caused by thermal expansion effects followed by a slight decrease due to resin chem-ical shrinkage. During the second dwell there is no variation in thickness whereas there is a slight thickness reduction at the end of the cycle during cool-down caused by thermal contraction. 
Overall, there is a quite good agreement between the experimental 
Time [hr] 
Fig. 3. Cure of 18 mm thick IM7/8552 .at panel; evolution of temperature and degree of cure at the centre of the laminate. 
laminate as well as due to the low thermal conductivity in the 
through the thickness direction. 
2.4.2. Thermo-mechanical model validation 
data and the simulation results (see Fig. 
5b) implying that the cou-pled model is capable of capturing the thickness evolution during consolidation, accounting for the cessation of compaction at gel
A series of experiments were carried out in order to validate the and also thermal expansion effects. Furthermore, it is shown that developed thermo-mechanical model. The cruciform specimen the model can capture the layup size effects; the CP laminate developed in [31] 
was used for the layup and geometry. Two differ-shows less thickness reduction than the BP laminate due to the fact 
ent con.gurations of 16 plies laminates were studied; cross-ply (CP), [0/90]8 and blocked-ply (BP), [904/04/904/04] as shown in Fig. 
4a. The experimental testing was carried out using an Instron 8801 universal testing machine with temperature controlled hot plates transferring the temperature and pressure pro.le to the samples (see Fig. 
4b). The nominal temperature and pressure pro-.le from the manufacturers recommended cure cycle were applied. The coupled thermo-mechanical model presented in Section 2.3 
was used to model the compaction of the two samples and the results were compared with the experimental data. Prescribed temperature boundary conditions were applied to all the bottom and top nodes of the model representing the hot plates, whilst pre-scribed pressure was applied to all the top nodes representing the 
a) 
that the apparent viscosity is proportional to the width to thick-ness ratio rendering the CP laminate considerably more viscous [31]. 
3. Wrinkle formation 每 AFP gaps and overlaps 
3.1. Sample design and experimental procedure 
In order to validate further the .ow model and coupled approach and to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in the consolidation of gaps and overlaps introduced dur-ing the Automated Fibre Placement lay-up process, a sample with a 
b) 

Cure Time [hr] Cure Time [hr] 
Fig. 5. (a) Heat transfer solution for cross ply and blocked ply laminate, (b) coupled solution for cross ply and blocked ply laminate. 
a) b) 

Fig. 6. Gaps and overlaps specimen (a) Ply book, (b) CT scan after vacuum consolidation, (c) Initial geometry for the FE analysis, obtained through forming of the plies initially laid-up ＆＆.at§ (see Fig. 
6a), (d) Realistic internal ply geometry in the FE model of the uncompacted sample after the forming phase. 
purposely severe combination of gaps and overlaps was designed and manufactured from broadgoods IM7/8552. As illustrated in Fig. 
6(a), the sample is a 100 mm 100 mm 6 mm with a cross-ply layup in which 3 defect areas are embedded in the 90 plies. Each of these defect areas is made of 5 gaps stacked on top of each other, directly above a stack of 5 overlaps. In the central defect region, the order of the gaps and overlaps regions are the opposite to the outer two regions. All the defects are 2 mm wide, which is of the same order of magnitude as defects introduced by an AFP process. Fig. 
6(b) shows a CT scan of the centre-line of a specimen that has been vacuum-bagged and then oven-cured for imaging purposes. 
The samples described above were submitted to two different types of thermomechanical loading. First, isothermal experiments were carried out at 70 C. The laminates were loaded at a rate of 
2.333 
kPa s 1 to 1 bar, 3 bars and 7 bars respectively and then maintained at these levels of pressure over 1 h. An Instron 8801 universal testing machine with temperature controlled hot plates was used to apply the temperature and pressure pro.le to the sam-ples. The obtained samples were then fully cured in an oven (with-out pressure) and micrographs were taken. The second test program used the same equipment to load the sample under the pressure and temperature cycle recommended by the manufac-turer [42], mimicking an autoclave curing process. 
3.2. 
Isothermal loading 
Although there is no composite manufacturing process that uses the load and temperature program applied in the isothermal tests, the levels of load and temperature were carefully chosen to be meaningful from a composite processing perspective. Thus, 70 C is close to the hot debulking temperature, 1 bar is equivalent to vacuum pressure, 3 bar is close to the pressure applied by an AFP roller and 7 bar is the autoclave pressure. These tests were carried out with 2 main objectives: 
to give further validation for the .ow model presented in Bel-noue et al. [32] 
for larger samples with more complex internal ply geometry to gain more understanding of the way gaps and overlaps con-solidate and interact during the consolidation process and the mechanisms involved. 
FE models of the tests described above were set up in Abaqus/ Standard. A ply-by-ply modelling approach was used. The neces-sity to start with an accurate geometry of the uncompacted speci-men led to the de.nition of a two-step modelling procedure. The .rst step consisted in the forming of the plies laid-up .at, as in Fig. 
6(a). As illustrated in Fig. 
6(c), this was done using a rigid plate that was moved down in order to progressively bring the plies into contact with each other. The 3 bumps observed on the sample top at the position of each of the defect areas (see Fig. 
6b), were repro-duced by placing 3 slits in the forming plate through which the material can penetrate. The good agreement between the FE model and a CT scan of a specimen that had been vacuum bagged and then oven cured with no pressure applied on the specimen (as can be seen comparing Fig. 
6(d) with Fig. 
6(b)) validated the choice of the forming procedure. The second part of the analysis consisted in the compaction of the samples between 2 rigid plates. In all the simulations, the material model for pre-preg was that from [32]. Custom-developed algorithms allowed for automatic mesh gener-ation and material property assignment from direct reading of the ply book. Single integration point elements with hourglass control were used, with one element per ply in the thickness direction. 
Fig. 7. Comparison of FE predictions with experimental results for the isothermal experiments. (a) Thickness vs Time evolution of the sample tested a 7 bar, (b) Experimental and predicted thicknesses of the samples tested at respectively 1 bar, 3 bar and 7 bar, (c) Micrograph of the defect area in the middle of the sample at 7 bar, (d) FE prediction for the internal ply geometry around a central defect region of the sample with a 7 bar applied pressure. 
As illustrated by Fig. 
7(a) and (b), the predicted thickness evolu-tion for the 3 levels of pressure compared very well with those measured experimentally. Similarly, good agreement is obtained when comparing samples＊ micrographs (Fig. 
7c) with the .nal ply geometry predicted by the model (Fig. 
7d). Both the ply thick-ness and the level of .lling of the gaps originally introduced in the sample are very well captured by the model. However, the pre-dicted wrinkle angle ( 15 in the sample tested at 7 bars) is more severe than what is observed in the micrographs ( 10). There are several possible explanations for this. Firstly, the model does not take account of the resin once it has bled out of the .bre bed into the gap. This potentially resists the development of the wrinkle. Secondly, as can be seen in Fig. 
6(b) and contrary to what is assumed in the model, the gaps (in the real samples) are not per-fectly aligned. This makes it more dif.cult for the wrinkle to develop. Lastly, as it has been shown in the context of dry .bre fab-ric forming [43], the bending stiffness can considerably affect the severity of the wrinkle. The present model was formulated for pre-diction of consolidation, with the value of the bending stiffness taken directly from Sj.lander et al. [44]. There a cantilever bending test was performed at 70 C on a piece of prepreg made from epoxy resin and IM .bres. The bending stiffness in an FE model of the test was adjusted until the predictions matched the experimental results. Sj.lander et al. [44] 
reported the dif.culty to calibrate this property properly. This suggests that, in the future, more effort should be dedicated to more clearly understanding the bending behavior of prepreg sheets under processing conditions. 
Fig. 
8, shows the initial con.guration and the .nal geometry predictions of the internal ply geometry around the central wrinkle for the 3 different pressure levels. As expected, most of the varia-tion of the thickness happens between 0 and 1 bar. The .gure high-lights the existence of two competing mechanisms in the way the gaps originally introduced within the laminates are .lled. Upon compaction, the gaps can either close due to the overlaps falling into the gaps (the wrinkle then becomes steeper) or they can be .lled laterally due to squeezing .ow (this prevents the wrinkle angle from increasing as can be seen at the position marked ＆a＊ on the sample loaded to 7 bars). Including capabilities for squeez-ing .ow into the model also allowed to take account of the higher compressibility of the overlapped areas. It can be clearly seen in the 7 bar sample that these regions are compacted nearly twice as much as the single plies. This was also observed on the micro-graphs of the samples (Fig. 
7c). 
3.3. Full cure cycle 
The second set of experiments, where the same apparatus was used to submit the sample to the manufacturer＊s recommended pressure and temperature cycle, was used to validate the two-step coupled thermo-mechanical model proposed in Section 2.3. The same material parameters as in Section 2.4.2 
and the same ini-tial mesh as Section 3.2 
were used. First, the temperature history at every gauss point in the model was calculated during the heat transfer analysis (which uses the UMATHT subroutine). This showed that, the temperature distribution through the thickness of the laminate was negligible with a slight temperature overshoot, in the order of two degrees at the beginning of the second dwell. The temperature .eld history was then given as an input to the mechanical analysis (which uses the UMAT subroutine). Fig. 
9(a) depicts the thickness evolution of the laminate, whilst Fig. 
9(b) presents a micrograph and the corresponding simulation result. It can be observed that the coupled model is able to predict the thickness evolution of the laminate during consolidation accu-rately. Comparison of the simulation results with the micrograph 
Fig. 8. Prediction for the internal ply geometry around the central wrinkle at different level of pressure. 
9(b) indicates that the coupled model predicts the morphology of the manufactured part successfully, including the .lling of the gaps as well as the formation and position of the wrin-kle. As with the isothermal experiments, the model slightly over-predicts the magnitude of the formed wrinkle. 
4. 
Although very informative about the mechanisms playing a role in the consolidation of gaps and overlaps, the study presented in the previous section was a rather simple and forced case compared to a real lay-up created by AFP. For example, the probability to see, 5 gaps facing exactly opposite to 5 overlaps is quite low. Moreover, in the industry AFP machines tends to be set-up so that they leave only gaps or only overlaps in the layup. The model＊s ability to pre-dict the effect of consolidation and curing on more realistic lay-ups with more complex distribution and a greater number of gaps and overlaps is presented. 
Two different lay-up con.gurations were modelled (see Fig. 
10). As for the previous section, a cross-ply con.guration was adopted. Both lay-ups had the same defect distribution but one of them only contained gaps whilst the other one only had overlaps. The defect width was 2 mm, which is consistent with the size of the defects 
Fig.10.Plybooksforthelayupswithacomplexdistributionofmanufacturingdefects.(a)100%overlaps每(b)100%gaps.a) 
mm7.4
b) 
gaps. 
introduced in an AFP process. The same modelling procedure as the one described in the previous section was used except that the laminate that contained only gaps did not need to be formed. The samples were assumed to be in.nitely long in the two in-plane directions therefore only a representative unit cell with fully constrained edges was modelled. Temperature and pressure boundary conditions were applied to simulate the samples being subjected to the cure cycle. It was assumed that the samples were consolidated between 2 aluminium plates, which were modelled as rigid bodies. The material parameters were the same as those used throughout the paper, given in Section 2. 
The results of the analysis are illustrated in Fig. 
11. Comparing the .nal internal geometry of the lay-up where only overlaps were introduced and the case with 100% gaps reveals signi.cant differ-ences between the 2 cases. The sample with 100% overlaps is about 
0.7 mm thicker. In addition, there is signi.cantly more .bre wavi-ness created in this sample. This is important from a design point of view as the level of .bre waviness can, as discussed in the intro-duction, impact the sample load carrying capacity greatly, whilst the sample thickness has implications for assembly tolerances. In the model there is a ＆void＊ formed at the top surface where the plies have deformed. In reality, this would be .lled by resin bleed, which can not be captured by the analysis. This may however be an artefact of the excessive ply bending, which was observed in the examples in Section 3. The difference in thickness observed between the two cases is partly due to the sample with embedded overlaps being originally thicker, as a result of the introduction of extra material in the overlapped regions. However as can be seen in Fig. 
11, it is also due to the samples with embedded gaps being able to compact more. This can mainly be explained by the fact that in the samples with embedded overlaps the plies are continu-ous (i.e. in.nitely long). It was shown in [31] 
that the higher the square of the ply thickness to width (i.e. dimension in the direction perpendicular to the .bre direction) ratio, the greater the amount of squeezing .ow and the more the material is able to compact. It can also be remarked that, contrary to what might be expected, there is almost no waviness in the samples with embedded gaps. This is because the samples gels very early on in the cure cycle, which results in the structure being ＆＆frozen§ and unable to deform any more. 
It is also interesting to remark that unlike what was observed in the case presented in Section 3 
where a sample with a deliberately bad combination of gaps and overlaps was analysed, lateral squeezing .ow does not seem to help to .ll up the gaps (see Fig. 
11b). This is because in the present case the ply thickness to width ratio is much smaller, thus limiting the ability of the mate-rial to squeeze. In this example, counterintuitively, the introduc-tion of gaps in the 90 plies compared to the overlaps has helped to increase the overall .bre volume fraction of the sample, since it is able to consolidate more easily. In the case of the overlaps, they cause the top tooling to be held up, preventing overall consol-idation of the un-overlapped regions. 
Finally, in order to demonstrate the model＊s ability to study dif-ferent manufacturing cases, an analysis where the hard top tooling was replaced by a soft vacuum bag was carried out (in practice a homogeneous pressure was applied to the top of the samples). The result of the analysis is illustrated in Fig. 
12. In the sample with embedded overlaps (see Fig. 
12(a)), soft tooling results in a lot less compaction than what was observed with hard tooling (see Fig. 
11 
(a)). This is the result of the applied pressure being non-homogeneously distributed when hard tooling is used. In fact, in the hard tooling case, the compacting plate is only in contact with the bumps at the surface of the sample. As a result, the force applied at the top of the tool is distributed over a much smaller area and the actual pressure applied on some parts of the lay-up is much greater than the external pressure applied to the rigid tool. This also results in much reduced waviness in the lay-up consoli-dated and cured under hard tooling. This is in good agreement with the observations made by Lan et al. [19,20] 
when studying the effect of tooling on the resistance to failure of samples containing gaps and overlaps. 
5. Conclusion 
This work has presented new insight into the formation of .bre path defects arising in AFP manufactured laminates, through experimental observations and predictive modelling. To achieve this a new multi-scale and multi-physics modelling framework for composite processing, based on a consolidation model pro-posed by Belnoue et al. [32] 
has been de.ned. Using a method pre-sented by Johnston et al. [33], the consolidation model was coupled to a heat transfer model for accurate description of the full cure cycle. Validation of the newly introduced models was .rst given for very simple test cases comparing FE predictions with experi-mental data. This model was then applied to analysis of the pro-cessing of specimens with gaps and overlaps introduced during the layup process and for the understanding of how these layup defects can evolve into .bre path defects. 
A specimen was designed with a purposely ＆＆bad§ combination of gaps and overlaps of realistic sizes. This magni.ed the effect of the different mechanisms participating in the gaps and overlaps consolidation and closure, thus facilitating their identi.cation. Samples were laid-up and processed in 2 different ways: isother-mally, subjected to 3 different pressure levels and following the manufacturer＊s recommended cure cycle (mimicking that of an autoclave). Micrographs of samples and measurement of the .nal thickness allowed further model validation. This highlighted the model＊s ability to capture the mechanisms leading to the .nal ply con.guration. Upon compaction, the gaps can either close due to the overlaps falling into the gaps or be .lled laterally due to squeezing .ow. Comparison between the model predictions and this set of experiments also highlighted the necessity for fur-ther investigation, in the future, at the effect of the ply bending stiffness on the wrinkle severity and to explore new methods to take this into account more accurately within the modelling frame-work proposed here. 
In the last part of the paper it was shown how the newly devel-oped numerical tool can be used to predict the evolution of the internal geometry and ply con.guration of components containing much more complex and realistic arrangements of gaps and over-laps. The emphasis has been put on predicting the effect of tooling on the samples＊ .nal internal geometry. It highlighted the effect of the plies＊ dimensions on the ability of the layup to compact. As much as 10% difference in the predicted thickness was obtained between the thickest specimen that contained the most severe waviness (100% overlaps with soft tooling) and the thinnest one (100% gaps with hard tooling). 
The new predictive capabilities developed here opens the way towards process optimisation and defect mitigation in parts man-ufactured by automated prepreg lay-up. For example, a sensitivity analysis on the material and processing parameters would help to limit the amount of part re-work and scrap by improving the gen-eral understanding of how manufacturing conditions affect the quality of the laminate. In addition, the modelling framework pre-sented in this study can be enhanced to predict residual stress and shape distortion occurring during the cure so that all the phenom-ena occurring during the manufacturing process of composites can be captured. It also holds potential to be used as part of a virtual framework for the prediction of the mechanical properties of engi-neering components made from composite materials, including the formation and effects of .bre path defects. 
Acknowledgements 
This work has been funded by the UK Engineering Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) Centre for Innovative Manufac-turing in Composites project ＆＆Defect Generation Mechanisms in Thick and Variable Thickness Composite Parts 每 Understanding, Predicting and Mitigation§ (DefGen), [EP/I033513/1]. Data for the cure simulations models, including equations and materials parameters can be found at https://data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/ 
x9rik93lx3tp1yeup4pe8kbti. 
