Carbon recycling efficiency and phosphate turnover by marine nitrifying archaea
Thaumarchaeotal nitrifiers are among the most abundant organisms in the ocean, but still unknown is the carbon
(C) yield from nitrification and the coupling of these fluxes to phosphorus (P) turnover and release of metabolites
from the cell. Using a dual radiotracer appr?o2ach, we found?5that Nitrosopumilus maritimus fixed roughly 0.3 mol
ammonia respired. Phosphate turnover may influence assimilation  fluxes by nitrifiers in the?1euphotic zone, whic?h1
parallel those of the dark ocean. Collectively, marine nitrifiers assimilate up to 2 Pg C year and 0.05 Pg P year
and thereby recycle roughly 5% of mineralized C and P into marine biomass. Release of roughly 50 Tg DOC and 0.2 Tg DOP by thaumarchaea each year represents a small but fresh input of reduced substrates throughout the ocean.
INTRODUCTION
In the deep dark ocean, widely distributed ammonia-oxidizing Thaumarchaeota (1) fix C at rates that parallel riverine transport of organic matter to the ocean or C buried in marine sediments [e.g., (2)]. As revealed by culture studies of the thaumarchaeon Nitrosopumilus maritimus, this important flux of the global C budget is supported by the high affinity of this microbe for ammonia (3) and its efficient C fixation pathway (4). Ship-board radiotracer incubations of bathypelagic microbes suggest that dark ocean chemoautotrophy ranges from 0.8 to
1.2 Pg C year?1 (2, 5, 6), but these estimates are >100% higher than geochemical mass balance estimates, which range up to 0.4 Pg C year?1
(7) and have assumed (i) complete oxidation of organic nitrogen
(N) sinking below the euphotic zone and (ii) a C yield from nitrification of 10% [C0/Nn = 0.1; Nitrosomonas marina; (8, 9)]. This discrepan- cy has been explained by missing transport of reduced N into the bathypelagic or alternative energy sources to support dark ocean chemoautotrophy (2, 6, 7, 10). However, in theory, C fixation by the 3-hydroxypropionate/4-hydroxybutyrate (HP/HB) pathway should lower the adenonine 5¡ä-triphosphate (ATP) demand of thaumarchaea
(4) and thus translate to a higher C yield for archaeal nitrification. This important coupling, which would adjust the ranking of marine nitrification in the global C budget, has not yet been established by empirical evidence.
   Thaumarchaea may be relatively more abundant than other microbes in the deep ocean, but absolute cell densities of marine archaea are actually the highest in the surface ocean (1, 11), owing in part to their strong affinity for ammonia (3). By assuming a conservative, median value for specific nitrification rates in surface waters, previous re- ports have suggested that epipelagic thaumarchaea may access 43% of ammonia and contribute roughly half of the flux of ¡°new nitrate¡± upwelled from the subsurface, with substantial consequences for estimates of new versus recycled production and the export of or- ganic material to depth (2, 12). Furthermore, C fixation by chemo- autotrophs in the surface ocean may be twice that of the deep sea (2).
This flux may be controlled, however, by competition for nutrients, such as dissolved inorganic phosphorus (Pi), the availability of which is known to limit biological production in open ocean gyres where recycled production is dominant (13, 14). While the small biovolume (15) and high-affinity phosphate and phosphonate trans- porters encoded in the genome (16) should allow for thaumarchaea to compete for scarce amounts of Pi in the surface ocean, the effect of P limitation on archaeal nitrification and the C yield from nitrification remains unknown. Despite the important roles of archaea in marine nitrification (15, 17), C fixation (5, 18, 19), and the release of labile metabolites that may fuel the microbial loop (20), the coupling of archaeal ammonia oxidation to marine nutrient fluxes is still poorly understood.
   This study sought to improve our understanding of thaumarchaeal contributions to marine nutrient recycling and to identify the responses of thaumarchaea to P limitation by determining cellular budgets and the coupled fluxes of C, N, and P by two cultured strains of N. maritimus. These aims were achieved via radiotracer experiments that quanti- fied cell-specific uptake rates of C and P as well as dissolved organic phosphorus and carbon (DOP and DOC) production rates of N. maritimus growing under a range of Pi concentrations. The P acquisition adaptations of N. maritimus isolated from a saltwater aquarium [strain SCM1; (15)] were further compared to those of a closely related environmental strain, N. maritimus NAOA6 (21), isolated from surface waters of the Benguela upwelling system at station GeoB12806 (13.6¡ãC; 25¡ãS, 14¡ã23¡äE; R/V Meteor cruise M76/1).
RESULTS
AOA growth response to P limitation
N. maritimus SCM1 grown in synthetic Crenarchaeota medium (SCM) with Pi as low as 0.4 ?M reached cell densities of 108 cells ml?1 (fig. S1, A and B), which is in the range for growth in SCM medium that contains ca. 30-fold higher Pi (14.7 ?M; 4). However, the maxi- mum cell density was reduced by at least 10-fold in SCM medium
N. maritimus NAOA6 being more negatively affected than aquarium strain SCM1 (fig. S1, A and B). Provided with an ample energy source (i.e., 1 mmol liter?1 ammonium), nitrite was continuously evolved by N. maritimus grown in medium with initial Pi > 0.4 ?M (hereafter P-replete medium >0.4 ?M Pi > P-deplete medium).
Nitrite production plateaued at 0.25 mM in experiments initiated at Pi < 0.2 ?M Pi (fig. S1, C and D) but nevertheless exhibited a period of linear increase at rates ranging from 0.3 to 5 ?mol NO2 liter?1 hour?1 (table S1 and fig. S3).
   Linear increases in 14C and 33P uptake by N. maritimus coincided with the exponential growth phase, with the exceptions of experi- ments performed in P-deplete media, which exhibited first-order uptake of C and P (table S1 and fig. S3) despite little evidence of growth (i.e., cell densities remained static and below 107 ml?1; fig. S1 and see Materials and Methods). Absolute C fixation rates were com- parable between the two strains, approaching 1.5 ?mol C liter?1 hour?1 under P-replete conditions and dropping to roughly 0.35 ?mol C liter?1 hour?1 in experiments where no KH2PO4 was added to the medium and growth was limited (table S1 and fig. S3). When grown under P-deplete conditions, P uptake by N.  maritimus NAOA6 (5 nmol P liter?1 hour?1) was roughly fivefold faster than that of SCM1 (1 nmol P liter?1 hour?1; table S1 and fig. S3).
Coupled rates of C fixation, Pi uptake, and nitrification
Cell-specific rates of both C and P uptake by N. maritimus NAOA6 were higher for P-limited cells and spanned much larger ranges [1 ¡Á 10?18 to 650 ¡Á 10?18 mol (amol) C cell?1 hour?1 and 50 ¡Á 10?21 to 2600 ¡Á 10?21 mol (zmol) P cell?1 hour?1] than strain SCM1 (5 to 50 amol C cell?1 hour?1 and 10 to 270 zmol P cell?1 hour?1); however, the ratio of C and P assimilation fluxes (C:Passim) by the environ- mental strain NAOA6 was more stable (60 to 150) than the aquari-
determined via scanning electron microscopy with energy-dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) measurements of the same concentrated
N. maritimus NAOA6 biomass were 57.7 ¡À 2.5 and 9.5 ¡À 1.2, respec- tively, for cells grown in P-replete media and contained relatively less P (80C:14N:1P) than cells grown in P-deplete medium (Table 2 and table S2) (22), which is consistent with the response of bacterioplankton to P limitation (23). On the basis of the quantitative, colorimetric determination of cellular P quotas, and the C:N:P ratios determined via SEM-EDS, we calculate C and N cell quotas of 34 ¡À 14 fg C cell?1 and 6.5 ¡À 2.8 fg N cell?1 for N. maritimus NOAO6 grown in P-replete medium, and 17 ¡À 6 fg C cell?1 and 3.4 ¡À 1.3 fg N cell?1 in P-deplete medium (Table 2).
Phosphate turnover time and specific affinity
Pi turnover was generally slow in P-replete media (?PO4 up to 1000 hours) and very rapid in medium with no Pi amendment (?PO4 as low as 3 hours; Fig. 3). ?PO4 was fastest in NAOA6 experiments but was always >50 hours in experiments with aquarium strain SCM1, even when grown in P-deplete medium. There was no growth of N. maritimus NAOA6 as ?PO4 fell below 5 hours in P-starved medium (i.e., with no KH2PO4 amendment; fig. S1), but cells exhibited a roughly 20-fold increase in nitrification rates and 500-fold increase in specific affinity for Pi (?¡ãPO4) than those grown under P-replete conditions (Fig. 3, A and B). The ?¡ãPO4 of N. maritimus generally increased in P-deplete media, climbing to >103 liter gcell?1 hour?1 (or 10?3 liter nmol P?1 hour?1) for strain NAOA6 grown in medium
um strain SCM1 (120 to 1000; Fig. 1A). Notably, for N. maritimus
cell
SCM1, the fastest cell-specific rates of Pi uptake (ca. 210 to 270 zmol P cell?1 hour?1) and the lowest C:Passim (120 to 200) were deter-
(or 10 liter nmol P hour ) for aquarium strain SCM1 (Fig. 3B).
mined for P-limited cells (Fig. 1A). During periods of linear uptake of both C and P (table S1 and fig. S3), cell-specific nitrification rates ranged from 0.1 to 1 fmol NO2 cell?1 hour?1 (Fig. 1B). Volumetric nitrification rates were correlated with both volumetric C fixation rate (R2 = 0.91 and 0.94, P < 0.02 and 0.01 for strains SCM1 and NAOA6, respectively; Fig. 2A) and P uptake rate (R2 = 0.97 and
Release of DOC and DOP
DOP in N. maritimus large batch cultures increased to 10 to 40 nM by stationary phase and accounted for 2 to 7% of assimilated Pi (table S2). DOP and DOC production by N. maritimus was also ob- served in the radiolabeled fractions. That is, after filtration of radio- labeled cells and precipitation of 33Pi or sparging of H14CO ?, 33P and
0.99, P < 0.01 for strains SCM1 and NAOA6, respectively; Fig. 2B).	14
The slopes of these relationships reveal the C and P yields from nitrification (C0/Nn = 0.57 ¡À 0.09 and 0.30 ¡À 0.04 mol mol?1; P0/Nn = 1.6 ¡À 0.1 and 2.7 ¡À 0.1 mmol mol?1 for strains SCM1 and NAOA6, respectively). However, these slopes integrate potentially distinct trends among P-limited versus P-replete cells. For the aquarium strain SCM1, C0/Nn values ranged from 0.44 to 1.2 (Table 1) and increased linearly with decreasing nitrification rate (fig. S4). C0/Nn values of the environmental strain NAOA6 were lower (0.18 to 0.41; Table 1) and showed no trend with volumetric nitrification rate but were rather lowest in incubations where cell-specific nitri- fication rate increased by an order of magnitude, i.e., for cells with the highest energy demand (fig. S4).
AOA cellular C, N, and P inventory
Cells harvested from the batch cultures prepared for P inventory experiments reached a cell density of 106 cells ml?1 (fig. S1); Pi was completely consumed in P-deplete medium (initial Pi ¡Ö 0.35 ?M), and 60 to 85% of Pi was consumed in P-replete cultures (initial Pi ¡Ö 1.6 ?M; table S2). Cellular P quotas of N. maritimus NAOA6 were 1.5 ¡À 0.6 and 0.53 ¡À 0.20 fg P cell?1 for cells grown in P-replete or P-deplete medium, respectively, as determined on the basis of cell counts and measurements of Pi and DOP in growth medium and total P of concentrated biomass (Table 2). C:P and N:P molar ratios
C activity was still detected in the medium, presumably as dis-
solved organics (i.e., 33ADOP and 14ADOC). On the basis of the 33ADOP signal, which was always significantly higher in live treatments than in the respective blank and killed controls (P < 0.05), DOP in culture media accounted for 0.5 to 3% of Pi assimilated into N. maritimus biomass (table S3). The integrated rates of DOP release, based on our single time point measurement and the maximum cell density, ranged from 5 to 80 zmol P cell?1 day?1 and were higher under P-deplete conditions for the environmental strain NAOA6. DOP release by N. maritimus SCM1 ranged from 5 to 27 zmol P cell?1 day?1 (table S3). DOC release was determined only in radiotracer incuba- tions and amounted to roughly 5% of C fixed by N. maritimus NAOA6 grown in P-replete medium; in contrast, 9 to 19% of C fixed by aquarium strain SCM1 was released as DOC on average. DOC production ranged from 5 to 55 amol C cell?1 day?1, with higher rates observed for strain SCM1 than NAOA6 (table S3). These rates are roughly equivalent to the release of up to 0.3 and 3% of the cellular P and C quotas, respectively. The C:P of dissolved organic matter (DOM) produced by N.  maritimus ranged from 2 ¡Á 103 to  8 ¡Á 103 for the aquarium strain SCM1 and was much higher than that of the environmental strain NAOA6 (600 < C:PDOM < 900). Normalized to rates of nitrification, DOP yield (DOP0/Nn) and DOC yield (DOC0/Nn) were on the order of 10 ?mol mol?1 and 50 mmol mol?1, respectively (Table 1).
DISCUSSION
The aquarium and environmental strains of thaumarchaeon
N. maritimus (SCM1 and NAOA6, respectively) exhibited orders of magnitude differences in their physiological response to Pi limita- tion, which were simulated by culture conditions under which Pi
turnover time (?PO4) spanned three orders of magnitude (3 to 1500 hours). Thaumarchaea are not necessarily P limited in the deep ocean, where Pi ranges from 1 to 3 ?M (24), and deep sea eco- types may physiologically diverge still further than observed among our experimental strains. Nevertheless, our findings provide insight into how thaumarchaea complete for energy and nutrients derived from recycled production. The following discussion examines the implications of these findings for chemoautotrophic fluxes in the dark ocean as well as in the surface ocean, where nitrification is prominent, Thaumarchaea are most abundant (1, 11), and P may be limiting (13).
Cellular energy budget and C, N, P coupling
The alternative coupling of energetic, C fixation, and P assimilation fluxes exhibited by the two N. maritimus strains can be considered in terms of maintenance energy, which is the conceptual inverse of C yield from nitrification. Using the HP/HB pathway, thaumarchaea require only 4 mol ATP to fix 2 mol C with every turn of the cycle (4). On the basis of the measured C yields from nitrification and conversion factors of 268 kJ mol?1 NH3 (25) and 40 kJ mol?1 ATP (26), we estimate that the aquarium strain N. maritimus SCM1 required 6 to 15 mol ATP per mol C fixed. Under P starvation con- ditions, chemoautotrophic C fixation rates by the aquarium strain
N. maritimus SCM1 surmounted those of nitrification, yielding C0/Nn values as high as 1.2 ¡À 0.2 (Table 1) and ATP requirements as low as 6 ¡À 1 per mol C. In contrast, N. maritimus NAOA6 grown under P-replete conditions required relatively more energy (19 ¡À 4 mol ATP per mol C), and this demand increased up to 38 mol ATP per mol C fixed under P limitation (C0/Nn = 0.18 ¡À 0.02; Fig. 3D). Thus, whereas the aquarium strain SCM1 appeared to prioritize C fixation without regard to P availability, the environmental strain devoted relatively more energy to maintenance and/or other cellular tasks.
   The inferences based on apparent maintenance energy demand are consistent with the relative assimilation fluxes of C and P (C:Passim),
which ranged up to an order of magnitude above Redfield stoichiometry for N. maritimus SCM1 and dropped to 120C:1P only under condi- tions in which P-starved cells could no longer fix C (Fig. 1A and table S1). In contrast, C:Passim of the environmental strain N. maritimus NAOA6 remained mostly constant and close to the Redfield ratio (106C:1P), even though the C:P of inorganic nutrient supply in ex- perimental treatments ranged up to 20,000:1 (Fig. 1A). Therefore, the changes in biomass C:P stoichiometry of N. maritimus NAOA6 induced by P stress were presumably manifested by altered nutrient allocation rather than nutrient acquisition strategy. By channeling Pi into intermediate metabolites, for example, N. maritimus NAOA6 could presumably create a favorable gradient for faster uptake of Pi and thereby increase ?¡ãPO4 [cf. (27)]. These inferences are also con-
sistent with the conditioning of N. maritimus SCM1 to a stable, aquarium environment (?PO4 > 50 hours; ?¡ãPO4 < 70 liter g?1cell hour?1), and the poise of strain NAOA6 to adapt to fluctuating oceanographic conditions in the thermocline, where ?PO4 can span 5 to 100 hours over 30-m depth (28).
   Together, these findings suggest that increased cellular power (Fig. 3A) may be a unique strategy of the environmental strain to fuel phenotypic alterations yielding higher ?¡ãPO4 as ?PO4 dropped below 50 hours (Fig. 3B). Furthermore, the C yield of nitrification by the environmental strain N. maritimus NAOA6 rebounded to
0.26 ¡À 0.03 at ?PO4 < 5 hours (Table 1 and Fig. 3C), suggesting a smaller maintenance energy requirement for P-starved cells that had adapted to P limitation. Combined with their high affinity for
ammonia (3), the adaptations demonstrated by the environmental strain should enable pelagic Thaumarchaeota to compete for limited nutrient and energy resources in ocean ecosystems dominated by recycled production. That is, (i) cell-specific nitrification rates were highest as ?PO4 decreased (Fig. 3A) to the range of time scales expected for the marine thermocline (28), and (ii) the Pi affinity of N. maritimus NAOA6 is on the same order as bacterioplankton and also strategically lower than cyanobacteria (Fig. 3B) (29), who generate reduced N energy via primary production in oligotrophic surface waters. Achieving heightened Pi affinity appears to come at the cost of re- duced C yield of nitrification (Fig. 3C); therefore, drastic changes in
?PO4 may contribute to the large variability in specific nitrification rates observed in the euphotic zone (12).
   Martens-Habbena et al. (3) previously suggested that marine thaumarchaea rapidly achieve maximum ammonium oxidation rates with small maintenance energy demand because the half-saturation constant for ammonium is constitutively low. It follows that the C yield of nitrification should not decrease for energy limited cells, which is similar to the response of N. maritimus NAOA6 adapted to ?PO4 < 5 hours (Table 1 and Fig. 3C); in fact, C yield increased at lower cell-specific nitrification rates (fig. S4). Because marine thaumarchaea in the bathypelagic ocean are likely limited by energy and therefore intrinsically adapted for rapid ammonium uptake (3), we expect that the maintenance energy requirement and C yield of nitrification of pelagic and bat- hypelagic populations should be independent of transient or limit- ing concentrations of ammonium, but this remains to be tested.
Implications of thaumarchaeal C fixation efficiency
Previous studies have estimated thaumarchaeal C fixation in the dark ocean [text S1; (2, 6, 7)] by invoking the C yield from nitrifica- tion (C0/Nn) for an ammonia-oxidizing bacterium (AOB) [N. marina; C0/Nn = 0.1; (8, 9)], but nitrifying thaumarchaea, i.e., N. maritimus, can be up to 10 times more efficient at fixing C (Table 1). High vari- ability in C0/Nn was evident between the aquarium and environmental strains of N. maritimus and in their response to P limitation (Fig. 3C and fig. S5); moreover, the C yield of uncultured, bathypelagic ecotypes may differ from those dwelling nearer the euphotic zone. Nevertheless, to estimate the significance of thaumarchaeal nitrification in the global C budget (Table 3), we apply a C0/Nn value determined via linear regres- sion of all incubations of the environmental archaeon N. maritimus NAOA6 (0.30 ¡À 0.04, R2 = 0.94, P < 0.01; Fig. 2A). This C0/Nn value
is threefold higher than previously assumed and is consistent with marine archaea fixing C via the more efficient HP/HB pathway ver- sus the Calvin-Benson cycle used by AOB [cf. (8, 9)
According to Redfield stoichiometry, mineralization of sinking particles in the ocean should yield 16 mol of reduced N (i.e., ammonia) for 106 mol of C respired. Ammonium may be recycled to support primary
production, either directly or following nitrification [i.e., regenerated production; (12, 14)], with the latter comprising the additional C fixation fluxes of nitrifiers that counter respired CO2. Applying the measured C0/Nn for archaeal nitrification (0.30) to a Redfieldian mineralization flux (106C:16N), we approximate that marine thaumarchaea recycle 4.5% of organic C mineralized in the oceans (Eq. 1)
Thaumarchaeal recycling (%DICremin ) = C0/Nn ¡Á 16/106 (1)
   This percentage is likely lower in the euphotic zone, where thau- marchaea compete with phototrophs for ammonium; however, given the preferential degradation of N relative to C from sinking particles (30), this is likely a conservative estimate of C recycling efficiency by a steadfast population of nitrifiers across the global bathypelagic ocean. By assuming a mineralization rate of reduced N exported to the ocean interior, a flux estimated at 92 Tmol N year?1 [(2) after (31)] to 330 Tmol N year?1 [cf. (7)], and the revised C yield for archaeal nitrification, we arrive at a dark ocean C fixation flux ranging from
0.33 to 1.2 Pg C year?1 (Table 3). This estimate approaches the upper range of direct measurements of dark ocean chemoautotrophy [0.8  to
1.2 Pg C year?1; (5, 6, 32); see text S1], without having to invoke additional sources of energy to fuel C fixation. However, nitrite- oxidizing bacteria (NOB) are also known to be active below the euphotic zone and would further oxidize the same N atoms to con- tribute an additive C fixation flux [~1 Pg C year?1; (32, 33)]. NOB are larger than N. maritimus, demand roughly an equivalent amount of ATP for each turn of their C fixation cycle (Fig. 3D) (4, 33), and in situ, single cell C and N uptake studies suggest NOBs may have a greater C yield than thaumarchaea (32, 34). Therefore, if the inte- grated ammonium and nitrite oxidation fluxes in the dark ocean transpire with a C yield of ~ 0.3, then the amount of remineralized C that is recycled into nitrifier biomass (%DICremin) could theoreti- cally approach 9% (Eq. 1). This amounts to ~0.86 Pg C year?1 if we conservatively assume an oceanic C export flux of 9.55 Pg C year?1 (31). C fixation by meso- and bathypelagic nitrifiers may therefore account for at least 70% of the upper estimate of total dark ocean chemoautotrophy.
   Chemoautotrophs were conservatively estimated to respire 43% of ammonia in waters above the thermocline, and thaumarchaea are also known to derive energy from other sources of reduced N, such as urea and cyanate (35). This translates to a C fixation rate upward of 0.8 Pg C year?1 (Table 3) and on the same order as dark ocean fluxes. Therefore, we estimate that global ocean C fixation supported by archaeal nitrification ranges from 1 to 2 Pg C year?1, or roughly 2 to 4% of net primary production [54 Pg C year?1; (31)]. If this flux is integrated over a standing stock of 1028 thaumarchaeal cells in the ocean (1) with a C content of 12.9 fg cell?1 (22), we esti- mate an average thaumarchaeal turnover time, or the residence time of C as thaumarchaeal biomass, on the order of 3 to 10 weeks, with growth rates ranging from 0.002 day?1 in the deep ocean to
0.4 day?1 in near-shore ecosystems (Table 3).
Thaumarchaeal cycling of P and DOM
Our dual radiotracer approach provided parallel rate measurements of P assimilation and DOM release by N. maritimus to further con- sider the coupling of these fluxes to nitrification in the global oceans (Table 3). Pi assimilation by Thaumarchaeota (ca. 20 Tg P year?1; Table 3) is on the same order as annual riverine input of Pi (24) and roughly 4% of that consumed by photoautotrophs in the surface
ocean, assuming Redfield stoichiometry and net primary produc- tion flux of 54 Pg C year?1 (31). Pi uptake of by Thaumarchaeota in the deep ocean is roughly equal in magnitude and could counterbalance 4.3% of P mineralized from sinking particles, assuming molar N:P ratios of 16:1 for mineralization (Redfield) and P0/Nn of 1:370 (Fig. 2B; cf. Eq. 1). This flux contributes to the P packaging onto particles known to be mediated by heterotrophic bacteria, having important consequences for the reactivity of organic P in the bathypelagic ocean and eventual burial in marine sediments (36).
   The proportional release of DOC by N. maritimus NAOA6 (5 ¡À 2%; tables S2 and S3) was similar to that reported for microbial photo- autotrophs [i.e., cyanobacteria; (37)] and suggests that thaumarchaea release 20 to 90 Tg C as DOC into the deep ocean each year (Table 3). A similar estimate of 14 to 51 Tg C year?1 can be extrapolated by applying the ratio of DOC:NO2 produced by N. maritimus NAOA6 (0.013:1; Table 1 and fig. S5) to the complete oxidation of the sinking flux of reduced N to the ocean interior (Table 3). As such, DOC release by thaumarchaea likely amounts to only a small fraction of
the total estimated organic C supplied to the deep ocean via sinking particles and advected DOC [10 to 26 Pg C year?1; (31, 38)], but may nevertheless represent a large portion of the labile DOC pool in the bathypelagic ocean [cf. (9)]. Similarly, the DOP:NO2 ratio (Table 1 and fig. S5) predicts a total release of roughly 0.32 Tg P y1 into the global ocean (Table 3). Given the capacity for thaumarchaea to metabolize phosphonates (16), this flux may contribute up to 10% of reduced compounds in the oceanic P redox cycle (39).
   While DOM produced by thaumarchaea is presumably labile (20), DOM release represents only a fraction of C and P assimilated into thaumarchaeal biomass, which may turn over on time scales longer than 1 year in the bathypelagic ocean (ca. 450 days; Table 3). The rates and yields reported for N. maritimus cultures in the current study represent an incremental step toward modeling bathypelagic chemoautotrophs, who operate at lower temperature, higher pressure, and may use other re- duced substrates [e.g., (10, 33)]. At present, our empirical evidence recommends that biogeochemical budgets include chemoautotrophic recycling fluxes driven by reduced N that mitigate at least 4.5% of detrital organic C respiration and transform 4.3% of detrital P into new P substrates.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental design and cultivation
Stock cultures (30 ml) of N. maritimus strains SCM1 and NAOA6 were grown aerobically at 28¡ãC in 30 ml of SCM (15) containing 1 mM ammonium and 2 ?M phosphate and were continuously trans- ferred to sterile SCM medium when nitrite concentrations approached 1 mM. For the 33P and 14C uptake experiments (scheme S1), large batch cultures were initiated by inoculating cells from stock cultures in the growth phase (25 to 30 ml; ca. 107¨C8 cells) into SCM media (0.8 liters) containing 0.1 to 1.6 ?M Pi. Sterile SCM medium that was not amended with KH2PO4 still exhibited measureable quanti- ties of Pi (ca. 130 nM), likely deriving from impurities in other com- ponents of the artificial seawater medium. After inoculation, nitrite concentrations in culture media were measured every 1 to 3 days via colorimetry to monitor growth after (15). Aliquots (45 ml) of the experimental batch culture were transferred into 13 sterile 50-ml plastic screw-top centrifuge tubes (Sarstedt, Germany) after the end lag phase growth, typically after 7 to 10 days, as suggested by nitrite concentrations increasing above a threshold of 0.1 mM. In addition to the radiotracer experiments, stock cultures of N. maritimus NAOA6 were also inoculated into triplicate batch cultures for cellular P quantification and SEM-EDS analyses (scheme S1).
Cellular P quotas and SEM-EDS analysis
N. maritimus NAOA6 was grown in triplicate, nonspiked batch cul- tures (0.8 liter SCM medium) amended to simulate P-deplete (0.35 to
0.37 ?M Pi) or P-replete (1.4 to 1.7 ?M Pi) conditions, and samples were collected for determination of Pi, total P (TP), and total dis- solved P (TDP) at the initial and final time points of cultivation. Growth was monitored via nitrite evolution and epifluorescence microscopy of cells fixed in 1.6% formaldehyde, filtered onto a 0.2-?m cellulose membrane (Whatman), and stained with SYBR Green I. At least 10 magnification fields (100¡Á) were counted. N. maritimus NAOA6 cells were harvested via centrifugation (4800g for 1 hour) when nitrite concentrations in all replicate P-deplete or P-replete cultures increased above a threshold of 0.3 or 0.5 mM, respectively, as suggestive of cells having entered the growth phase. Most of the
supernatant was decanted and the pelleted cells were resuspended in a small volume (<10 ml) of culture medium remaining in the bottle (i.e., cell concentrate). Aliquots of the cell concentrate samples were analyzed for Pi, TP, and TDP as described below. The remaining volume of the cell concentrate was fixed with formaldehyde (final
red detection in triplicate, and DIC concentrations were calculated based on a series of calibration standards prepared from a stock solution 1000 mg liter?1 from ULTRA Scientific (IQC106).
33P and 14C uptake experiments and activity measurement
concentration 1.6%) and stored at 4¡ãC. Cell density of the concen- trated, fixed sample was determined via staining SYBR Green I as above.
For SEM-EDS analysis, aliquots of concentrated and fixed
N. maritimus NAOA6 cells (1 to 1.5 ml) were pelleted for 20 min at 20,000g in 2-ml centrifuge tubes and then washed three times by resuspending in 1 ml of deionized water and repeating the centrifu- gation step. The washed and pelleted cells were then resuspended in 5 ?l of water and air dried onto a silicon wafer. For P-limited cells that were also subjected to cell weight analysis, cells were washed twice by pelleting at 3000g for 5 min, resuspended in 1 ml of Milli-Q water, and a 30-?l aliquot was air dried for 2 hours onto a silicon wafer. After dehydration, the silicon wafers were mounted onto electrically conductive adhesive tags (Leit-Tab, Plano GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) for elemental ratio analysis.
   C:N, C:P, and N:P elemental ratios were obtained using a scan- ning electron microscope (Quanta FEG 250, FEI) equipped with an energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) double detector system (QUANTAX EDS, Bruker Nano GmbH). The detectors (XFlash 6/30) had a detector area of 30 mm2 and an energy resolution at Mn K ? line of <123 eV, allowing the quantification of most light ele- ments. To check the performance of the EDS system, the NBS SRM 1155 ANSI 316 stainless steel standard was used. The EDS spectra were tested using an accelerating voltage of 10 and 20 kV to see if other elements with a higher atomic number than Ca were present in the sample. A 10-kV acceleration voltage was used for further measurements, which had a reduced penetration depth. The elemental ratios were calculated for five object fields using the QUANTAX 400 software (version 1.9, Bruker), in which the elements C, N, O, Na, Mg, Al, P, S, Cl, K, and Ca were included.
Phosphate and bicarbonate concentration
Samples (10 ml) for Pi, TP, and TDP were collected from culture media using a sterile pipette. TDP samples were gently filtered through a Luer lock filter (Sartorius; pore size, 0.1 ?m). Pi, TDP, and TP samples were immediately frozen at ?20¡ãC. Concentrations of Pi, TP, and TDP were determined via the molybdenum-blue colorimetric method (40) on a QuAAtro AA3 Dual Channel Total P & Ortho- phosphate Autoanalyzer with a 100-cm Liquid Waveguide Capillary Cell (Seal Analytic, Germany). DOP concentrations were estimated as TDP minus Pi and were corrected for the concentration of DOP measured in sterile SCM medium (0.07 ?M). Precision of the Pi, TP, and TDP measurements was 0.75% (1 ? coefficient of variation), and the minimum quantifiable limit for Pi was 20 nM, and 41 nM for TP and TDP. Cell P quota estimates are derived from the TP of cell concentrate minus the TDP value of the culture media at the final time point of cultivation.
   For total dissolved inorganic carbon, samples of culture medium (1.8 ml) were filled into an annealed (550¡ãC) vial and sealed without air bubbles and stored at 4¡ãC. The dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) contents were determined with a multi N/C 2100S analyzer from Analytik Jena. Immediately before the measurement, 150 ?l of each sample was discarded and automatically replaced by 50 ?l of 10% H3PO4. The outgassing CO2 was analyzed via nondispersive infra-
For each 33P or 14C uptake experiment, five 45-ml treatment cultures, including three live treatments, one killed control, and one blank, were spiked with either 33P-labeled carrier-free, phosphoric acid or 14C-labeled bicarbonate (Hartmann Analytic GmbH, Braunschweig, Germany) to an activity of ca. 150 kBq. In parallel to the 10 radiotracer uptake experiments (five each for 33P and 14C uptake), three non- spiked treatments (45 ml) were grown aerobically at 28¡ãC to monitor growth via nitrite evolution as well as epifluorescence microscopy (scheme S1). Briefly, cells were enumerated in at least 10 magnification fields (100¡Á) after fixing with formaldehyde (final concentration,
>1.6% v/v), filtering onto 0.2-?m polycarbonate membranes (Isopore GTTP; 25 mm), and staining with 4¡ä,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. The experimental blanks served as controls for abiotic 33P or 14C incor- poration into particles and were prepared by filtering 45 ml of the cul- ture medium through a Luer lock syringe filter (Sartorius; pore size, 0.1 ?m) before spiking with radiotracer. The killed control treatments were prepared by incubating culture aliquots at 80¡ãC for >45 min and then cooling to room temperature before the radio- tracer spike.
   After spiking, the centrifuge tubes were gently shaken for 10 s, and samples were collected for both time point zero (t0; 5 ml) and total radioactivity (33Atotal and 14Atotal; Bq ml?1). For the latter, samples (100 ?l) were added directly to 6-ml scintillation vials and amended with 5 ml of scintillation fluid. For all spiked treatments, culture aliquots (3 to 5 ml) were collected at time points distributed over ca. 200 hours following label addition, fixed with formaldehyde in the filtration tower to a final concentration of 2 to 4% for 20 min, and then vacuum filtered over 0.2-?m polycarbonate membranes (Isopore GTTP; 25 mm). The filters were then rinsed three times with 5 ml of MilliQ water to remove residual Pi. Each filter was then transferred to a 6-ml scintillation vial and amended with 5 ml of scintillation fluid (Irgasafe Plus, PerkinElmer). The volume-normalized radio- activity on the filter (33Acell or 14Acell; Bq ml?1) was measured on a Packard 2500 TR scintillation counter, with quench correction (tSIE/ AEC based on 14C quench standards). During each time point sam- pling, while the spiked culture aliquots were being fixed with form- aldehyde, nitrite and cell density samples were collected from the parallel nonspiked, live treatments. Nitrite was measured as described above for stock cultures. Cell count samples (1 ml) were fixed by adding 0.1 ml of 20% formaldehyde and stored at 4¡ãC until analysis (as above).
Determination of C and P assimilation rates, Pi turnover time, and specific affinity for Pi
The fraction (f ) of bicarbonate or Pi assimilated into biomass was calculated as the ratio of activity in biomass (i.e., on the filter; 14Acell or 33Acell, respectively) to total radioactivity added (i.e., f = 14Acell/14Atotal or 33Acell/33Atotal). The mean fractional uptake for triplicate measure- ments was corrected by that of the killed control. Absolute quantities of assimilated bicarbonate and Pi were determined on the basis of the fractional uptake estimates (f, unitless) and the initial concen- tration (mol liter?1) of these nutrients in the culture medium before partitioning into individual incubations and at most 2 hours before radiotracer addition. Rates of C and P assimilation were determined
via linear regression using MATLAB 2014a for the time interval over which the culture was in the growth phase, or, for experiments
activity of biomass observed during the course of the experiment (33Acell or 14Acell)
exhibiting little or no increase in cell density, rates were determined
over the interval of linear increases in the radiotracer uptake (i.e., first-order uptake). Errors in rate estimates are based on the 95% confidence interval of the slope coefficients (see Statistical analysis).
DOP release rate (mol P cell?1d?1) =
Rates of cell-specific C and P uptake and nitrite production were determined for specific time points based on estimates of cell density (cell liter?1) and the increase in assimilated bicarbonate or Pi since the previous time point. Pi turnover time (?PO4; in hours) was calcu- lated for each time point (t) according to (41)
?PO4(h ) = t ¡Á [?ln(1 ? f ) ]?1	(2)
   The specific affinity (?¡ã; liter gcell?1 hour?1 or liter nmol P?1 hour?1) of N. maritimus for Pi was calculated according to (27)
¦Á¡ã(L g?1 cell h?1 ) = [¦ÓPO4 ¡Á cell density]?1	(3)
   N. maritimus cell abundance was converted to either P content (nmol P), based on cellular P quota determined in P-deplete or P-replete medium, or cell weight [gcell; 24.6 fg cell?1; (22)]. Propagated error of ?¡ã was based on uncertainty in measurements of cell abundance, the fractional uptake of radiotracer, and cellular P quota.
Determination of DOP and DOC production rates
Estimates of DOP and DOC release into culture media were measured at the end of the experiments and, thus, integrate accumulation during incubation period. At the final time point of the radiotracer assay, the remaining volumes of the live, killed control, and blank treatments (3 to 6 ml) were fixed in 1 to 2% formaldehyde for >20 min, filtered through a Luer lock syringe filter (Sartorius; pore size,
0.1 ?m), and collected into 15-ml centrifuge tubes or 20-ml scintillation vials for DO33P or DO14C analysis, respectively. For measurements of DOP radioactivity (33ADOP), Pi was first coprecipitated with mag- nesium from the medium by adding 0.15 ml of 3 M NaOH (pH 11) and centrifuging at 700g for 45 min to remove the spiked 33Pi after (42). The supernatant was decanted into 20-ml scintillation vials and amended with twice the volume of scintillation fluid. For DOC radioactivity measurements (14ADOC), the filtrate was acidified to pH 2 by adding 30 ?l of concentrated hydrochloric acid and bubbled with N2 for >5 min to remove inorganic 14C. The mean 33ADOP or 14ADOC activity of triplicate live treatments was corrected by of the corresponding killed control. For incubations of NAOA6 at 130 and 160 nM Pi, the sparging time was obviously too short (i.e., <25 min), and these anomalously high values are not reported. For NAOA6 and SCM1 incubations at <100 ?M Pi, 14Acell values were too low to
provide reliable estimates of DOC release. The concentration of DOP or DOC produced during the experiment was determined as
PERDOP(%) = 100 ¡Á33 ADOP /33 Acell	(5)
Statistical analysis
Reported 95% confidence intervals, R2 statistics, and P values of linear regressions were computed using the MATLAB R2014a regress function. Significance differences (P value) reported for radiotracer uptake or release as DOP or DOC between live, killed, and blank treatments refer to the probability associated with a homoscedastic Student¡¯s t test.
the product of the fraction of total radiotracer (33A
Macrofaunal control of microbial community structure in continental margin sediments
Through a process called ¡°bioturbation,¡± burrowing macrofauna have altered the seafloor habitat and modified global carbon cy- cling since the Cambrian. However, the impact of macrofauna on the community structure of microorganisms is poorly understood. Here, we show that microbial communities across bioturbated, but geochemically and sedimentologically divergent, continental mar- gin sites are highly similar but differ clearly from those in non- bioturbated surface and underlying subsurface sediments. Solid- and solute-phase geochemical analyses combined with modeled bioturbation activities reveal that dissolved O2 introduction by burrow ventilation is the major driver of archaeal community struc- ture. By contrast, solid-phase reworking, which regulates the distri- bution of fresh, algal organic matter, is the main control of bacterial community structure. In nonbioturbated surface sediments and in subsurface sediments, bacterial and archaeal communities are more divergent between locations and appear mainly driven by site- specific differences in organic carbon sources.
rganic matter (OM) is supplied to the ocean through in situ photosynthesis and by external input from terrestrial sour-
ces. Although only a small fraction of OM escapes mineraliza- tion in the water column and reaches the sediment surface, marine sediments are the largest OM sink on Earth over geologic timescales (1). Whether sedimentary OM is preserved or min- eralized is in part controlled by microorganisms, which through a network of hydrolysis, fermentation, and respiration (i.e., terminal oxidation) reactions convert OM to its inorganic constituents. Despite the important role of microorganisms in determining the fate of sedimentary OM, the factors that control microbial com- munity structure in marine sediments are not well understood. A vertical zonation of respiration pathways based on Gibbs energies has been proposed (2). However, such a clear zonation is absent from many surface (3) and subsurface sediments (4), and respiring organisms often only account for a small percentage of anaerobic microbial communities (5). Instead, genomic and cultivation- based data suggest that most anaerobic sediment microorgan- isms gain energy from the fermentative or acetogenic breakdown of OM (6¨C10). Additionally, correlations between certain bacterial taxa and input of fresh phytoplankton detritus in surface sediment (11), widespread occurrence of certain Thaumarchaeota in oxic sediments (12), and dominance of phylogenetically distinct mi- crobial taxa in energy-depleted subsurface sediments (13) indicate that OM quality, presence of O2, and overall energy availability are important drivers of microbial community structure.
¡¡A further factor that influences microbial activity and com- munity structure in marine surface sediment is bioturbation. Globally, >95% of the seafloor underlies oxygenated bottom water (14), with most of this seafloor being inhabited by macrofauna
(15). These macrofauna interfere with the vertical zonation of respiration reactions, change the distribution of OM, and influence rates of microbial OM remineralization in surface sediments (15,
16) by two different modes of behavior. During ¡°reworking,¡± macrofauna displace particles, including sediment grains and or- ganic detritus, through locomotion, burrow construction, ingestion, or defecation. Reworking is often divided into ¡°biodiffusional mixing,¡± which describes random particle mixing over short dis- tances, as well as ¡°nonlocal mixing,¡± which describes unidirectional particle transport over distances of centimeters to decimeters (17). During ¡°burrow ventilation,¡± macrofauna flush their burrows with overlying water, meanwhile causing ¡°bioirrigation,¡± which de- scribes the enhanced solute transport through bulk sediments around the burrow (17). Both processes vary with the types of macrofauna that are present. Suspension feeders pump large amounts of oxygenated seawater through their burrows and can thereby   induce redox  fluctuations   in  burrows  and  sediment
porewater (18). By contrast, deposit feeders mostly perform par- ticle reworking, and thereby mix freshly deposited OM and oxi- dized solid-phase compounds from the seafloor into deeper layers and vice versa (19).
¡¡Despite its well-studied impact on sediment geochemistry, little is known about the importance of bioturbation in struc- turing microbial communities. Burrow wall microbial abundance and diversity are often elevated and resemble those at the sed- iment surface (20, 21). In addition, sulfate-reducing, denitrifying, and nitrifying bacteria are often enriched in burrow walls (22, 23). Less is known about how bioturbation influences the com- position of microorganisms throughout the bioturbated layer, even though the geochemical influence of bioturbation extends beyond burrows (18). Recently, Chen et al. (24) reported a dominance of Bacteria over Archaea throughout bioturbated sediment, and equal abundances of both domains in underlying subsurface sediments. The same study also noted a clear change in bacterial and archaeal taxa from bioturbated to nonbioturbated layers. Chen et al. (24) hypothesized that introduction of electron
acceptors (e.g., O2, NO ?) by burrow ventilation and labile OM (e.g., phytodetritus) by particle reworking were responsible for the observed patterns in microbial communities.
¡¡Here, we test this hypothesis by analyzing depth profiles of microbial communities at four continental margin sites across the Baltic Sea¨CNorth Sea transition. Sites differ in water depth, sedimentation rate, metal and OM content, microbial activity, and macrofaunal community structure, and range from non- bioturbated to ventilation and/or reworking-dominated. At each site, we quantify ventilation and reworking intensities by per- forming reaction-transport modeling on porewater solutes and particulate tracers, respectively, and determine redox state, total organic carbon content (TOC), distributions of fresh OM, and OM sources based on C-isotopic values (¦Ä13C-TOC) and eukaryotic 18S rRNA gene sequences. We then analyze trends in microbial community structure in relation to modeled macrofaunal activities and measured environmental variables. We show that burrow ventilation mainly drives archaeal, whereas particle reworking predominantly drives bacterial community structure in surface sediment. We moreover observe that microbial communities in nonbioturbated surface sediments more closely resemble those in underlying subsurface layers than those from similar depths in bioturbated sediment.
Results
Sedimentological Characteristics. Four sites (AU1, AU2, AU3, and AU4) were sampled along a water-depth gradient in the Skagerrak¨CKattegat¨CLilleb?lt region between the North Sea and Baltic Sea (586, 319, 43, and 37 m, respectively; SI Appendix, Fig. S1 and Table S1). AU1 is located in the Norwegian Trench, has a high solid-phase manganese content (SI Appendix, Fig. S2 and Table S2), and receives sediments with low-reactivity OM through horizontal transport by currents (25). AU2 is located on the southern slope of the Norwegian Trench. Both AU1 and AU2 consist mainly of silty clay and have high rates of iron and man- ganese reduction in the top 0 to 10 cm (26). AU3 in the northern Kattegat is dominated by fine sands and silts, and also has high rates of iron cycling (26). AU4 in the Lilleb?lt region of the Baltic Sea is sulfidic with the exception of a 1-mm-thick oxidized surface layer. Like AU1 and AU2, AU4 is dominated by silty clay, but the sediment has a more muddy consistency. While porosities de- crease and densities increase in the top 50 cm of all sites (SI Appendix, Fig. S3), sediment grain sizes do not change notably with depth (for detailed core descriptions, see SI Appendix, Sup- plementary Text). Sedimentation rates based on 137Cs profiles in- crease with decreasing water depth and distance to shore, and are
0.14, 0.27, 0.30, and 0.33 cm¡¤y?1 at AU1-4, respectively (SI Ap- pendix, Fig. S4 and Table S2). Macrofaunal biomass increases from AU1 to AU3, whereas macrofauna are absent from AU4
due to seasonal bottom water hypoxia (26) (SI Appendix, Table S2).
Biogeochemical Profiles. Vertical porewater profiles of oxygen  (O2), sulfate (SO 2?), methane (CH ), and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) suggest that microbial sulfate reduction, meth- anogenesis, and total respiration (DIC production) increase from AU1 to AU4 (Fig. 1A). Accordingly, DIC profiles steepen, while both O2 penetration depth (AU1, 15 to 18 mm; AU2, 8 mm; AU3, 4 mm; AU4, <1 mm; from ref. 26) and the depth of the sulfate¨C methane transition (SMT), below which SO 2? is depleted and CH4 accumulates, become shallower. Despite this general trend in microbial activity and despite ongoing sulfate reduction, SO 2? and DIC concentrations are nearly constant in the top 60, 10, and 25 cm of AU1, AU2, and AU3, respectively.
¡¡TOC trends vary between stations and are not correlated with water, sediment depth, or microbial activity (Fig. 1A). The highest TOC is at AU4, where values increase with depth from 4.7 to ?6% in the upper 50 cm. At AU3, which has the lowest TOC, values decrease from 0.8% at the seafloor to 0.5% at 50 cm¡ªshowing a local peak at ?30 cm¡ªand gradually increase back to 0.8% below. TOC decreases gradually from the seafloor to the core bottom at AU2 and AU1, from 2.1 to 1.7% at AU2 and from 1.9 to 1.3%     at AU1.
¡¡¦Ä13C-TOC and carbon-to-nitrogen (C:N) ratios at  AU1  to  AU3 fall within typical ranges of marine phytoplankton (27). ¦Ä13C-TOC  is  relatively  constant  with  depth  at  AU1  (?22.8 ¡À
0.2¡ë) and AU2 (?22.5 ¡À 0.2¡ë), while at AU3 values decrease
from ?23.0¡ë to ?24.1¡ë in the upper 50 cm and stabilize below. AU4 has ¦Ä13C-TOC similar to the other stations from 0 to 20 cm (?22.7 ¡À 0.3¡ë), but increases to approximately ?20¡ë at 50 cm and below suggest a significant additional TOC source, e.g., seagrass (28). C:N values vary minimally at AU1, AU2, and AU4 (mostly 8 to 9). At AU3, C:N ratios increase from ?8 to 10
in the upper 40 cm, and further to ?12 in the deepest sample.
Macrofaunal Activity  and  Community  Composition.  Chlorophyll  a  (chl a) depth profiles reflect the input of fresh phytodetritus by sedimentation and translocation of this phytodetritus to greater depths by reworking (29) (Fig. 1B). The contribution of chl a to TOC is negatively correlated with water depth (SI Appendix, Fig. S5A), indicating a decrease in labile OM deposition with in- creasing water  depth. At AU1, chl  a decreases  threefold from   3 cm to underlying layers. At AU2 and AU3, chl a shows bimodal distributions, with surface peaks at ?7 and ?3 cm and subsurface
peaks at ?27 and ?30 cm, respectively. The steepest chl a de-
crease is at the nonbioturbated AU4, where chl a values drop over 10-fold in the upper 5 cm and show only minor increases
from 10 to 20 cm. Ratios of chl a/(chl a + phaeopigments), which are another proxy for fresh phytodetritus (30), confirm the trends observed in chl a (SI Appendix, Fig. S5B).
¡¡Macrofaunal reworking was quantified by modeling solid- phase biodiffusional mixing (DB) and nonlocal mixing (Na), whereas published solute-phase bioirrigation coefficients (¦Á) on the same cores were used as proxies for ventilation rates (26). DB, Na, and ¦Á generally decrease with water depth, matching the decreasing macrofaunal biomass from AU3 to AU1 (Fig. 1B and SI Appendix, Table S2). AU1 is dominated by the stationary tube-dwelling polychaete Spiochaetopterus typicus, which feeds on suspended particles and surface deposits, and the surficial burrow-building, mainly ventilating chemosymbiotic bivalve Thyasira equalis (31) (Fig. 1C). DB and ¦Á values are relatively high in the upper 5 cm but decrease below detection below 10 cm. The macrofaunal community at AU2 is dominated by Thyasira equalis, the subsurface deposit-feeding bivalve Yoldiella lucida, surface deposit-feeding and ventilating Abra nitida, in addition to several deep-dwelling, deposit-feeding worms (Melinna cristata, Galathowenia oculata, Maldanidae sp., and Neoleanira tetragona).
This functionally diverse assemblage matches the high DB and ¦Á values from 0 to ?13 cm. However, the continuously high excess 210Pb and Na values to 40 cm are difficult to explain with these fauna. One possibility is that the thaliassinidean shrimp, Calocaris macandreae, which is common in the area and can dig intensively to
60 cm or deeper (32), was missed due to limited depth penetration of our box corer. Matching the high DB and ¦Á values throughout the upper 10 cm, AU3 is dominated by dense populations of the brittle star  Amphiura  filiformis  (>1,000  individuals  [ind.]¡¤m?2)  and the
bivalve Kurtiella bidentata. Both are biodiffusors that typically live in
<10-cm depth and feed on fresh phytodetritus (33). In addition, specimen of the ghost shrimp Callianassa tyrrhena, which forms deep, gallery-like burrows, were found in deeper layers (16 ¡À 4 ind.¡¤m?2), and explain the clear subsurface peaks of 210Pb and Na at
?20 cm. Matching the absence of macrofauna, DB, Na, or ¦Á values
indicate no significant bioturbation activity at AU4.
¡¡To facilitate the comparison of geochemical and microbial community data, we define the upper layers of sediment, where
bioirrigation rates (¦Á) are high, as ventilation-dominated layers (VLs hereafter). Deeper layers, where bioirrigation is largely reduced but significant reworking, in particular nonlocal mixing, is still present, are termed reworking-dominated layers (RLs hereafter). The inferred zonation of dominant bioturbation ac- tivities generally matches depth profiles of chl a and %Fe(III) [percentage of Fe(III) of reactive solid-phase iron (Fig. 1B); data from ref. 26]. %Fe(III), an indicator of sedimentary redox con- ditions, decreases in a similar fashion to ¦Á values throughout the VLs and remains at background values below and throughout the nonbioturbated site AU4. However, to avoid definitional biases, all correlation analyses between environmental variables and microbial community data performed later in this study are independent of the proposed divisions into VLs and RLs.
Microbial Abundance and Richness. 16S rRNA gene abundances of Bacteria show similar depth profiles across sites and decrease by one to two orders of magnitude from core tops to bottoms (Fig. 2A). Except for a decrease in the top 4 cm of AU1 and AU3, archaeal gene abundances are relatively stable in the top 200 cm of AU1, 40 cm of AU2, 35 cm of AU3, and 20 cm of AU4, and  only decrease with depth below.
¡¡Bacteria-to-Archaea ratios (BARs) decrease with depth, showing the highest values in the VLs of AU1 to AU3 and at the seafloor of AU4 (Fig. 2B). At AU1 to AU3, BARs increase in surface sediments and then show a clear drop in the RLs. Local peaks in  VLs  and  RLs generally  match  local  peaks  in  chl a or
excess 210Pb. Below the RLs, BARs continue to decrease to ?100 cm, below which values are relatively stable. AU4 shows a dif-
ferent trend: Except for the peak value at the seafloor, BARs are lowest above the SMT, and increase gradually below the SMT.
¡¡Chao 1 richness is higher in Bacteria than in Archaea except at the sediment surface of AU4 (Fig. 2C). At AU1 to AU3,  bac- terial and archaeal richness increase throughout the VLs and reach their highest values in the RLs before decreasing below. At AU4, bacterial richness stays relatively constant, whereas ar- chaeal richness decreases strongly in the top 30 cm.
Depth Profiles of Microbial Communities. Microbial community structure changes consistently from bioturbated to nonbioturbated sediments, and between the VLs and RLs of bioturbated sites
(Fig. 2 D and E). In the VLs of AU1 to AU3,  Bacteria belonging to Bacteroidetes, Acidobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria, Deltaproteo- bacteria, Gammaproteobacteria, and Planctomycetes are dominant. In the RLs, percentages of Gammaproteobacteria and Bacter- oidetes decrease, while fractions of Deltaproteobacteria, Plancto- mycetes, and Chloroflexi increase (Fig. 2D). The nonbioturbated surface sediment of AU4 (0 to 20 cm) is also rich in Bacteroidetes, Gammaproteobacteria,  Deltaproteobacteria,  and  Planctomycetes, but here these groups coexist with a significant percentage of Chloroflexi. The nonbioturbated layers of AU1 to AU3 and layers below 30 cm at AU4 share Deltaproteobacteria, Planctomycetes, and Chloroflexi as dominant bacterial fractions. Furthermore, Atribacteria clearly increase below the SMTs, where methano- genesis dominates the terminal OM degradation. Additional, site- specific characteristics in subsurface layers include high percent- ages of Aminicenantes at AU1 and AU3, and high percentages of Spirochaetae at AU2.
Among the Archaea, the Marine Group I class (Thaumarch-
aeota) dominates the bioturbated layers of AU1 to AU3  (Fig. 2E). In the VLs, two phylotypes, Nitrosopumilus sp. 1 [98.7% similarity to Nitrosopumilus cobalaminigenes (34)] and Nitro- sopumilus sp. 2 (95.8% similarity to N. cobalaminigenes), account for 33 ¡À 14% and 30 ¡À 8% of total archaeal abundance, re- spectively. While Nitrosopumilus sp. 1 is virtually absent from nonbioturbated samples, Nitrosopumilus sp. 2 occurs locally at high relative abundances in nonbioturbated subsurface layers. Percentages of Woesearchaeota are high in bioturbated layers (15 ¡À 6%), but also in nonbioturbated layers of AU1 and AU4. Relative abundances of Bathyarchaeota (mainly Group C3) are high everywhere except in VLs of AU1 and AU3 and the surface layer of AU2. Euryarchaeota (mainly Marine Benthic Group D [MBG-D] of Thermoplasmata), Lokiarchaeota (mainly gamma subgroup), and Thorarchaeota are rare or absent within VLs, but increase and are abundant in RLs of AU1 to AU3 and in non- bioturbated sediments. Methanomicrobia are rare at all stations, except below the SMT of AU3 and AU4 (>99% ANME-1b).
Microbial Community  Assembly  and  Its  Potential  Drivers  Across  the Four Sites. A principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) (also known as multidimensional scaling analysis) indicates significant differ- ences in microbial community compositions between VLs, RLs,
and nonbioturbated sediments (Fig. 3A). These differences are
robust across different distance matrices (e.g., unweighted Uni- frac, Bray-Curtis; SI Appendix, Fig. S6) and taxonomic levels (e.g., phylum, class, order, and zero-radius operational taxonomic unit [ZOTU]; SI Appendix, Fig. S7). Burrow wall communities (AU3 only) cluster with those in adjacent bulk sediment, and thus follow the division between VLs and RLs (Fig. 3A and SI Appendix, Fig. S8). By contrast, microbial communities in nonbioturbated sam- ples are separated by sites, and show strong depth-related changes, especially in Bacteria. The only nonbioturbated sample that clusters with bioturbated samples is the bacterial community at the seafloor (0 to 2 cm) of AU4.
¡¡A canonical analysis of principal coordinates (CAP) shows that different environmental variables are correlated with bio- turbated and nonbioturbated communities (Fig. 3B). Bacterial and archaeal communities in bioturbated sediments are signifi- cantly correlated with the modeled bioturbation variables (¦Á, DB, Na), and with SO42? and %Fe(III). Furthermore, bacterial, but
not archaeal, communities show significant correlations with chl
a, and neither are significantly correlated with C:N ratios. In nonbioturbated sediments, bacterial and archaeal communities correlate with CH4, TOC, and ¦Ä13C-TOC. The above variables explain 68% of bacterial and 75% of archaeal total community variation. Most of this variation is accounted for by the first two axes displayed in Fig. 3B, which explain 50.3% of bacterial and 54.1% of archaeal variation.
Eukaryotic 18S Gene Abundance and Community Structure. The ob-
served correlations with TOC, ¦Ä13C-TOC, and chl a suggest an important role for OM content, sources, and degradation state in driving microbial community structure. Here, we explore eukary- otic 18S rRNA sequences for insights into OM sources, inputs of OM by ventilation and reworking, and distributions of living
eukaryotes (Fig. 4).
¡¡18S rRNA gene copies decrease in the upper meter, with depth profiles at each site matching the distributions of modeled macrofaunal activity, but are similar across sites below 100 cm. At AU4, gene copy numbers drop fivefold in the top 3 cm, but only decrease slightly below. At AU1 to AU3, 18S gene copy numbers decrease by two orders of magnitude throughout the bioturbated zone, with the steepest decreases occurring within the VLs. Below the RLs, gene copy numbers decrease gradually at AU2 and AU3, and increase slightly at AU1.
¡¡18S rRNA gene sequences suggest dominant contributions of photosynthetic organisms, with the highest contributions at AU4 (>90% in all but surface sediments). At all sites, fractions of diatoms belonging to diverse Bacillariophyta decrease steeply with depth and are correlated with chl a distributions (Spearman r = 0.76, P < 0.001; SI Appendix, Fig. S5C). 18S genes of the diatom Chaetoceros spp. (shown separately) are an exception. Sequences of these diatoms show less depth attenuation compared to other diatoms, and even dominate the subsurface of AU4. Dinoflagellates (Dinoflagellata, mainly Dinophyceae) have low relative abundances in the VLs but increase in the RLs and some
subsurface layers. AU3 and AU4 show elevated contributions of
green algae (Chlorophyta, mostly unicellular Trebouxiophyceae) and plants (Streptophyta, mainly Zostera marina, minor contribu- tions of terrestrial angiosperms) in deeper layers, confirming the high DNA preservation potential of both phyla in marine sediments (35).
¡¡Among the nonphotosynthetic eukaryotes, protistan bacter- ivores, dominated by Excavata (mainly Euglenida and Kineto- plastida) and benthic Foraminifera (mainly Globothalamea and Monothalamida), are most abundant in the VLs of AU1 to AU3. These distributions are consistent with the O2 or nitrate require- ments of these groups and imply that both groups may live in the VLs of these stations. By contrast, uncharacterized marine stra- menopiles (MAST) have increased percentages in the nonventilated
horizons of AU1, uncharacterized Cercozoa occur at high pro- portions throughout AU1 to AU3, and Fungi account for high fractions in nonbioturbated layers of AU1 and AU3. At AU1, metazoan 18S genes of worms (Annelida, mainly Polychaeta) and flat worms (Platyhelminthes) dominate the VLs, whereas tunicates (mainly Ascidiacea) dominate in deeper layers. The other sites have lower metazoan 18S gene contributions dominated by Nematoda (AU2 to AU4), Annelida (AU2), and Arthropoda (surface sample of AU4; mainly Copepoda) in surface sediments
and by Urochordata, Annelida, Cnidaria, and Arthropoda in sub- surface layers. Bivalves and brittle stars were only detected at very low (<0.1%) relative abundances, despite being dominant mem- bers of the macrofaunal communities at AU1 to AU3.
Drivers of Bacterial vs. Archaeal Community Structure in Surface and Subsurface Sediment. Variation partitioning analyses coupled with redundancy analyses (VPA-RDA) and Mantel tests were incorpo- rated into a path model to analyze the most important drivers of microbial community structure in surface (0 to 40 cm) vs. subsurface sediments (>40 cm; Fig. 5). Hereby the relative importance of all environmental variables tested in Fig. 3B was determined.
According to VPA-RDA, the variables that provide the most
explanatory power in surface sediment account for 50% and 58% of bacterial and archaeal community variation, respectively (Fig. A). Notably, ventilation and reworking differ in their impacts on bacterial and archaeal communities. Reworking, based on non- local mixing (Na) and biodiffusional mixing (DB), appears to drive bacterial community structure by controlling OM compo- sitional variables (chl a, ¦Ä13C-TOC, and TOC; r2 = 0.50, P < 0.05,
concentrations and bioirrigation rates (¦Á) are less important. By contrast, archaeal community variation is mainly explained by bioirrigation. Mantle tests, moreover, show that eukaryotic 18S rRNA gene sequences are highly correlated with bacterial and archaeal community structure and explain a higher fraction of bacterial (r = 0.83) than archaeal community variation (r = 0.50). In subsurface sediments, VPA-RDA suggest that TOC and ¦Ä13C-TOC,  and to  a lesser  extent  SO42? and CH4, are  the  main
drivers  of  microbial  community  structure  (Fig.  5B).  Measured
variables explain 56% of bacterial but only 29% of archaeal com- munity variation. According to Mantle tests, eukaryotic 18S rRNA gene sequences are again highly correlated with and explain comparable fractions of bacterial (r = 0.40) and archaeal com- munity variation (r = 0.46).
DB, Na), 2) geochemical variables [%Fe(III), chl a, SO  2?, CH4,
partial	least-squares	[PLS]	regression),	whereas	SO4
Discussion
Our study indicates that bioturbation controls microbial com- munity structure in surface sediments across continental margin sites that differ greatly in water depth, sedimentation rates, input of fresh OM, TOC content, redox conditions, microbial activity,
and macrofauna (Figs. 1¨C3). Independent of macrofaunal abun- dance, community structure, or dominant mode of behavior (ven- tilation, reworking), bacterial and archaeal communities inhabiting bioturbated surface sediment are highly similar to each other, and differ significantly from those in nonbioturbated surface or
subsurface sediments (Figs. 1 and 3A). While bioturbation gen- erally favors Bacteria over Archaea (BARs; Fig. 2B), both bac- terial and archaeal richness are lowest in sediments with high ventilation rates and highest in reworking-dominated sediments (Fig. 2C). Ventilation, moreover, selects for different lineages (Type Ia) than reworking (Type Ib), and is most likely the main driver of archaeal community structure in surface sediment through its impact on O2 availability and redox conditions (Figs. 5A and 6). By contrast, reworking appears to drive bacterial communities through its influence on fresh OM distributions.
¡¡In subsurface sediments, where bioturbation is absent, bacte- rial community structure is mainly correlated with organic carbon content and sources (TOC, ¦Ä13C-TOC) and methane concentra- tions, whereas the main drivers of archaeal community structure remain unclear (Figs. 5B and 6). Stronger site-specific community clustering in Archaea suggests that site-related variables may play a more important role in structuring archaeal than bacterial communities (Fig. 3). Type III ¡°subsurface lineages¡± of Bacteria and Archaea show strong correlations with 18S genes of certain eukaryotic groups (Fig. 6). Archaea generally show stronger cor- relations with nonphotosynthetic MAST, Fungi, and Cercozoa, whereas Bacteria show stronger correlations with photosynthetic Chlorophyta and Streptophyta. The implications of these correla- tions are unclear, though it is worth mentioning that bacterial communities in surface sediments also show strong correlations with biomarkers of photosynthetic organisms, i.e., chl a, 18S genes of diatoms (Bacillariophyta others; Figs. 5A and 6A). Yet, the ex- istence of Type II ¡°ubiquitous lineages¡± indicates that not all mi- crobial lineages are controlled by bioturbation or OM sources.
¡¡Besides correlating with ¦Á, many Type Ia taxa also strongly correlate with 18S gene percentages of labile algae (Bacillar- iophyta others) and protists (Foraminifera, Excavata). Correla- tions with benthic Foraminifera and Excavata match the aerobic or facultatively anaerobic metabolism of Type Ia microorganisms and these protists. By contrast, correlations with carbohydrate- and amino acid-rich diatoms [Bacillariophyta others (41)] are consistent with the use of carbohydrates and amino acids as energy substrates by several Type Ia taxa.
¡¡While all ¡°Type Ib¡± lineages and many Type II bacteria (e.g., Alpha- and Deltaproteobacteria) are also present in high read percentages throughout the VLs, high ventilation rates seem to select against Type III ¡°subsurface lineages.¡± These lineages may not tolerate O2 exposure and/or the strong redox fluctuations that are the norm in bioturbated surface sediments (16). Several Type III groups,  including  Bathyarchaeota,  Lokiarchaeota (gamma subgroup),  Thorarchaeota,  Euryarchaeota  (MBG-D), and Chloroflexi (Anaerolineae and Dehalococcoides) already in- crease in percentages in deeper parts of the VLs and the un- derlying RL, and are abundant in nonbioturbated surface sediment of AU4.
Impact of Reworking on Microbial Community Structure. Our study indicates that reworking strongly impacts bacterial but not ar- chaeal community structure by mediating the transport of fresh OM into sediment (Figs. 3B and 5A). Matching this trend, bac- terial but not archaeal gene abundances are significantly corre- lated with chl a content (Spearman r = 0.86, P < 0.001) and eukaryotic gene abundances (Spearman r = 0.92, P < 0.001) in
surface sediments of bioturbated sites (SI Appendix, Fig. S12).
Correlations of several Type II members with SO 2? or CH sug-
4	4	Reworking-related Type Ib bacterial taxa show strong corre-
gest possible involvement in respiration reactions or syntrophic associations with microorganisms involved in respiration reactions.
Impact of Ventilation on Microbial Community Structure. It appears that strong ventilation activity reduces microbial richness and selects for distinct ¡°Type Ia¡± aerobic and aerotolerant microor- ganisms that are highly similar across sites (Figs. 1 and 2). The impact of ventilation is not restricted to burrow walls but extends throughout the entire VL, as indicated by only minor differences in community structure between burrow walls and bulk sedi- ments (Fig. 3 and SI Appendix, Fig. S8). Possibly the high rates of porewater exchange and sediment mixing cause sediments throughout the entire VL to come into contact with O2 or ex- perience strong redox fluctuations on a frequent basis. These frequent chemical disturbances may exclude many anaerobes and select for a low diversity of redox-resilient microorganisms. Ventilation is the main driver of archaeal community variation  in surface sediments (Fig. 5A), and in particular favors two phy- lotypes of the aerobic nitrifying thaumarchaeotal genus Nitro- sopumilus (Fig. 2). The relative abundance of one of these phylotypes, Nitrosopumilus sp.1, is even highly correlated with ventilation rates (Spearman r = 0.86, P < 0.001; SI Appendix, Fig. S11). While ventilation is only a minor driver of bacterial com- munity variation in surface sediments, relative abundances of several verrucomicrobial classes (Opitutae, Verrucomicrobiae) and gammaproteobacterial orders (Oceanospirillales, BD7-8, Alter- omonadales) are significantly correlated with ¦Á. Previous marine isolates of Verrucomicrobiae and Oceanospirillaceae (dominant family of Oceanospirillales in our study) were aerobes with broad substrate spectra (including monosaccharides, amino acids, alco- hols, organic acids), and some Oceanospirillaceae additionally perform nitrate reduction (36, 37). Opitutae, Psychromonadaceae (dominant family of Alteromonadales), and BD7-8 subgroup com- monly live in symbiotic relations with marine sediment inverte- brates and are facultatively anaerobic carbohydrate degraders (Opitutae,   Psychromonadaceae)   or putatively chemoautotrophic,
aerobic sulfide oxidizers (BD7-8) (38¨C40).
lations with chl a content and 18S gene percentages of diatoms (Bacillariophyta others; Fig. 6). These lineages comprise mostly aerobic, microaerobic, and facultatively anaerobic Bacteria that degrade algal polysaccharides, e.g., Flavobacteriia (42) of Bac- teroidetes, Sandaracinaceae of Myxococcales (43), and organo- and photoorganotrophic Halieaceae [main family of gammapro- teobacterial Cellvibrionales (44)]. Many Type Ib lineages, e.g., Flavobacteriia, Sphingobacteriia (both Bacteroidetes), and Sav0071 (Gammaproteobacteria), are, furthermore, distributed indepen- dent of bioirrigation rates (¦Á) or redox status [%Fe(III)] (Fig. 6A). In addition, several metabolically diverse lineages correlate sig- nificantly with nonlocal mixing (Na). The metabolisms of these lineages include nitrification [e.g., Nitrospinae (45), Nitro- somonadales of Betaproteobacteria (46)], aerobic methylotrophy [E01-9C-26 of Gammaproteobacteria (47)], aerobic organotrophy [Arenicella of Gammaproteobacteria (48)], anaerobic organotrophy [Bacteroidia of Bacteroidetes (49)], and sulfate reduction [Sva0485 of Deltaproteobacteria (50)].
The diversity of aerobic, microaerobic, and anaerobic metab-
olisms among Type Ib lineages, and the fact that many Type III lineages already emerge in the RLs, explains the high diversity in sediment layers where reworking is the dominant macrofaunal activity. We suggest that the decreased O2 input but continued significant input of fresh OM results in a spatially and temporally heterogeneous mosaic of oxic to anoxic conditions and OM ranging from fresh detritus to diagenetically altered, low-reactivity compounds. The richness in chemical microenvironments results in a high diversity of metabolic niches that support the coexistence of physiologically diverse Type I bioturbated, Type III subsurface, and Type II ubiquitous lineages within the same macroenvironment.
Changing Communities from Surface to Subsurface Layers. The shift toward Type III subsurface lineages in nonbioturbated sediment is accompanied by a decrease in microbial richness as Type I lineages, which appear linked to O2 and fresh OM input, de- crease in relative abundance (Figs. 2 and 6). At AU4, where O2 is absent, Type III Archaea (gamma subgroup of Lokiarchaeota,
Bathy- and Thorarchaeota, Thermoplasmata) and Bacteria are present at the seafloor (Anaerolineae, Dehalococcoidia) or emerge at depths where labile phytodetritus (chl a, Bacillariophyta others) is depleted (Atribacteria) (Figs. 2 and 4).
Despite  these  consistent  changes  from  bioturbated  to non-
bioturbated sediments, the reasons for the high site dependency of microbial community structure in nonbioturbated sediments remain unclear. Percentages of many Type II taxa are signifi- cantly correlated with SO 2? concentrations, whereas percentages of numerous Type III taxa are significantly correlated with CH4 concentrations (Fig. 6). The correlations of Methanomicrobia with
CH4 concentrations and of Desulfobacterales with SO 2? concen-
sampled using a box corer (40 cm ¡Á 40 cm ¡Á 60 cm). For detailed sampling scheme, see SI Appendix, Supplementary Text.
Macrofaunal Analysis. Faunal sampling, identification, and quantifications were as outlined by Kristensen et al. (26). Sediments from two to three box cores per station were sieved through 1-mm mesh on board, and the re- trieved material preserved in 4% formaldehyde. Fauna were separated from debris in the laboratory and stored in 70% ethanol for later counting, identification to lowest possible taxon, and classification into functional groups based on faunal mobility and feeding behavior. Macrofaunal bio- mass was estimated based on abundance data and known relationships between water depth and average individual biomass from the Kattegat¨C
Skagerrak area (26, 61, 62).
trations match the known CH4-cycling and SO4 -reducing me-
tabolisms of these taxa, respectively. In other cases, syntrophic partnerships with sulfate reducers or methanogens offer a potential explanation.
¡¡OM composition may also be important, given that many subsurface microorganisms gain energy by fermentative or ace- togenic breakdown of OM (6¨C10). Consistent with this notion, a major fraction of subsurface bacterial community variation can be explained with TOC and ¦Ä13C-TOC (Fig. 5B). Moreover, ¦Ä13C-TOC and percentages of major 18S lineages correlate sig- nificantly with major Type III groups (Fig. 6). Dominant bacte- rial lineages degrade aromatic compounds and fatty acids [Dehalococcoidia (8)], or ferment carbohydrates or proteins [Anaerolineae (51), Omnitrophica (52), Aminicenantes (53), Spi- rochaetes (54)]. Atribacteria have been linked to syntrophic growth on organic acids with methanogenic partners (55) and to fermentation of sugars and organic acids (9). Dominant Archaea have been linked to protein fermentation [MBG-D (7), Thor- archaeota (56)], fermentative or acetogenic breakdown of pro- teins, carbohydrates, and lignin [Bathyarchaeota (10)], fermentation of unknown substrates [Aenigmarchaeota (52)], and syntrophic growth on amino acids [gamma subgroup of Lokiarchaeota (57)].
Conclusions and Further Implications. Our study indicates that macrofaunal bioturbation controls microbial community assem- bly at all phylogenetic levels and promotes dominance of Bac- teria over Archaea in surface sediments from diverse continental margin settings. Burrow ventilation appears to control archaeal community structure mainly by regulating O2 input. By contrast, reworking appears to be the main driver of bacterial community structure, presumably by controlling the distribution of reactive OM. The reasons for bacterial dominance over Archaea remain uncertain, but may be related to higher metabolic versatility among surface sedimentary Bacteria. Certain Bacteria have been shown to thrive in natural and engineered habitats under oxic¨C anoxic fluctuations by means of their ability to rapidly shift be- tween aerobic respiration and fermentation (58, 59). Similar adaptations may confer fitness advantages to certain groups of Bacteria in bioturbated sediments.
¡¡While literature data suggest that the energy substrates of major bacterial and archaeal lineages overlap at the compound level, relative abundances of many bacterial classes are strongly correlated with 18S percentages of photosynthetic eukaryotes. By contrast, archaeal lineages, in particular Type III subsurface lineages, tend to be more strongly correlated with nonphotosynthetic MAST, Fungi, and Cercozoa. Future investigations will reveal whether these trends reflect general differences in detrital food sources among Bacteria and Archaea.
Materials and Methods
Sampling. All samples were taken during a cruise of the R/V Aurora in August to September 2014. The top 50 cm of sediment were collected using a Rumohr corer, which is a lightweight gravity corer that enables access to nearly undisturbed surface sediments (60). All deeper layers were sampled using a gravity corer (down to ?500 cm). Sediments for faunal analysis were
DNA Extraction.  DNA was extracted from unhomogenized ?0.2 g of wet
sediment following lysis protocol II of the modular method of Lever et al. (63), which combines chemical (lysis solution I) and mechanical cell lysis (bead-beating: 0.1-mm Zirconium beads), 2¡Á washing with chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (24:1), and precipitation with a mixture of linear polyacrylamide, so- dium chloride, and ethanol. DNA was then purified according to protocol A of the CleanAll DNA/RNA Clean-Up and Concentration Micro Kit (Norgen Biotek Corporation). To minimize adsorptive losses of DNA during the extraction, samples were homogenized with 0.1 mL of 10 mM sodium hexametaphos- phate solution prior to cell lysis.
Quantitative PCR. Abundances of bacterial and archaeal 16S rRNA genes and eukaryotic 18S rRNA genes in DNA extracts were quantified on a LightCycler 480 II (Roche Life Science) by SYBR-Green I-based quantitative PCR (qPCR).
The primer pairs for Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya were Bac908F_mod (5¡ä- AACTCAAAKGAATTGACGGG-3¡ä) (63)/Bac1075R (5¡ä-CACGAGCTGACGACARCC- 3¡ä) (64), Arch915F_mod (5¡ä-AATTGGCGGGGGAGCAC-3¡ä) (65)/Arch1059R (5¡ä- GCCATGCACCWCCTCT-3¡ä) (66), and All18SF_mod1  (5¡ä-TGCATGGCCGTTCT-
TAGT-3¡ä)/All18SR_mod1 (5¡ä-CTAAGGGCATCACAGACC-3¡ä) (ref. 35, modified
from ref. 67), respectively. Plasmids of 16S rRNA genes from Holophaga foe-
tida (Acidobacteria) and Thermoplasma acidophilum (Euryarchaeota) and of 18S rRNA genes from Tubifex (Oligochaeta) were applied as bacterial, ar- chaeal, and eukaryotic standards, respectively (further information in SI Ap- pendix, Supplementary Text).
Sequencing and Bioinformatic Analyses. Sequence libraries were prepared according to a standard workflow (SI Appendix, Supplementary Text). 16S rRNA gene amplicons obtained with the primer pairs S-D-Bact-0341-b-S-17
(5¡ä-CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3¡ä)/S-D-Bact-0785-a-A-21    (5¡ä-GACTACHVGGG-
TATCTAATCC-3¡ä) (68) for Bacteria and S-D-Arch-0519-a-A-19 (5¡ä-C AGCMG- CCGCGGTAAHACC-3¡ä)  (69)/967Rmod  (5¡ä-GTGCTCCCCCGCCAATT-3¡ä)  (65)  for Ar-
chaea were sequenced via the MiSeq platform (Illumina). Raw sequence reads were quality-checked by FastQC (www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/pro- jects/fastqc), read ends were trimmed using seqtk (https://github.com/lh3/ seqtk), paired end reads were merged into amplicons by flash (70), primer sites were trimmed by usearch (71), and quality filtering was done by prinsEq (72). ZOTUs were generated using the UNOISE3 algorithm (73) and clustered using a 97% identity threshold. Bacterial 16S genes and eukaryotic 18S genes were taxonomically classified using the SILVA 16S database [release 128 (74); con- fidence threshold, 0.7] and Protist Ribosomal Reference database [PR2 v.19 (75); confidence threshold, 0.9], respectively. Archaeal 16S genes were assigned in ARB (www.arb-home.de) using neighbor-joining phylogenetic trees that were based on a manually optimized SILVA database that was ex- panded to include 16S gene sequences from whole-genome sequencing studies.
Geochemical Analyses. Sediment chl a and pheophytin from ?1.5 g wet sediment were extracted in 90% acetone and quantified spectrophoto- metrically following an acidification method (76). To measure TOC, total
nitrogen (TN), ¦Ä13C-TOC, and ¦Ä15N-TN isotopic compositions, sediment sam- ples were dried, decarbonized, and homogenized. Analyses were done on 5- 30 mg of homogenized sediments by elemental analyzer/isotope ratio mass spectrometry, as described previously (77). Porosity and wet density of sed- iments were calculated from the wet and dry weights of 2-cm3 sediments. CH4 concentrations were measured by gas chromatography as published
previously (78). Porewater concentrations of SO42? and DIC were measured by ion chromatography and gas chromatography and were published pre-
viously (79), as were bioavailable Fe(II) and Fe(III) contents, which were extracted using 0.5 M HCl and measured spectrophotometrically (26).
Radionuclides. Two HPGe gamma spectrometry systems (ORTEC GMX-120265 and GWL-100230) were used for radionuclides analysis (210Pb, 46.52 keV; 214Pb, 351.99 keV; and 137Cs, 661.62 keV) (80). Efficiencies of gamma de- tectors were calibrated using IAEA reference materials (RGTh and RGU) and an in-house secondary standard (¡°Rock-Falling Mountain Soils¡±; RMC-AEC Taiwan). Excess 210Pb was calculated by subtracting 214Pb (used as an index of 226Ra, i.e., supported 210Pb) from total 210Pb. The activities of radionu- clides were decay-corrected to the sampling date. All radionuclide data were calculated on a salt-free dry-weight basis.
Transport¨CReaction Models. Biological mixing rates of sediment particles were modeled based on the steady-state conservation equation for radiotracers (210Pb) (81) with consideration of biodiffusional and nonlocal mixing effects:
Multivariate Statistics. Statistical analyses were performed in R (www.R- project.org) and based on ZOTU-level phylogenetic assignments unless stated otherwise. Chao1 richness, and PCoA and CAP coordinates using Unifrac and Bray¨CCurtis distances were calculated using the ¡°phyloseq¡± package (82). In the CAP analysis, ¦Á, DB, Na, and %Fe(III) were assumed to be zero at >40 cm. Using the ¡°vegan¡± package (83), we performed 1) a PERMANOVA analysis (permutations = 999) to examine the (dis)similarity between different groups of samples; 2) VPA-RDA to determine how environmental factors individually or jointly contribute to microbial community variation; and 3) Mantel tests to examine correlations between microbial and eukaryotic communities. Using PLS regressions in the R package ¡°plsm,¡± we examined impacts of reworking activities on variations of OM distributions (84). A cooccurrence network of
bacterial and archaeal lineages was constructed using  Cytoscape
where x is depth; Cs, the concentration of excess 210Pb; ¦Õs, the solid volume
Center for Biotechnology Information, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov (bac-
fraction; Fs
, the constant flux of solid sediment to the seabed; ¦Ñs, the solid-
terial and archaeal 16S, BioProject PRJNA565394; eukaryotic 18S: Nucleotide
phase density; and Cs, the excess 210Pb concentration atx 0; ¦Ë is the 210Pb decay constant. Fixed concentration and zero concentration gradients were imposed at the sediment¨Cwater interface and at 50-cm depth, respectively. Biodiffusional mixing DB and nonlocal mixing Na were described by the following:
DB(x) = DB (0) erfc(x ? xDB ),	[2]
accession nos. MN487107-MN488526). All geochemical, qPCR, and modeled bioturbation rate data are included in Dataset S1.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This study was funded by Swiss National Science Foundation Project 205321_163371 (to M.A.L.). M.-S.S. was supported by the Independent Research Fund Denmark (G-Ice Project 600 7014-00113B/FNU). The Aurora expedition was jointly funded by the Danish National Research
Foundation and European Research Council Advanced Grant (294200,
MICROENERGY) (to B.B.J.). We thank the captain, crew, and scientific party of the expedition and the following persons: Laura Piepgras (MPI Bremen) and Kasper Urup Kjeldsen (Aarhus University) for sampling assistance and data sharing; Marianne Lyngholm Nielsen, Trine Ravn-Jonsen, Anders M?ller Mathiasen, Mads Kl?ve Hallstr?m (all Aarhus University), and Adrian Gilli
Parameters that describe the mixing coefficients at x 0 DB 0 , Na 0 ,
mixing depth (xDB , xNa), and spread (¦ÒDB , ¦ÒNa) were adjusted to reproduce the observed excess 210Pb profiles. The bioirrigation coefficients (¦Á) were calcu- lated by Kristensen et al. (26), by fitting a double-exponential nonlocal ex- change function (similar to Eq. 3) to the measured DIC profile.
(Eidgen?ssische Technische Hochschule Z¨¹rich [ETH Z¨¹rich]) for help with core scanning and descriptions; Madalina Jaggi (ETH Z¨¹rich) for assistance with TOC and isotopic analyses; Feng-Hsin Hsu (National Taiwan University) for radionuclide measurements; and Jean-Claude Walser (ETH Z¨¹rich) for bioinformatic assistance.
Microbial community and geochemical analyses of trans-trench sediments for understanding the roles of hadal environments
Abstract
Hadal trench bottom (>6000 m below sea level) sediments harbor higher microbial cell abundance compared with adjacent abyssal plain sediments. This is supported by the accumulation of sedimentary organic matter (OM), facilitated by trench topography. However, the distribution of benthic microbes in different trench systems has not been well explored yet. Here, we carried out small subunit ribosomal RNA gene tag sequencing for 92 sediment subsamples of seven abyssal and seven hadal sediment cores collected from three trench regions in the northwest Paci?c Ocean: the Japan, Izu-Ogasawara, and Mariana Trenches. Tag-sequencing analyses showed speci?c distribution patterns of several phyla associated with oxygen and nitrate. The community structure was distinct between abyssal and hadal sediments, following geographic locations and factors represented by sediment depth. Co-occurrence network revealed six potential prokaryotic consortia that covaried across regions. Our results further support that the OM cycle is driven by hadal currents and/or rapid burial shapes microbial community structures at trench bottom sites, in addition to vertical deposition from the surface ocean. Our trans-trench analysis highlights intra- and inter-trench distributions of microbial assemblages and geochemistry in surface sea?oor sediments, providing novel insights into ultradeep-sea microbial ecology, one of the last frontiers on our planet.
Introduction
The abyssal plain extends from the continental slope to the rim of deep trenches (3000每6000 m below sea level [mbsl])
and covers 85% of the global sea?oor area, while the hadal zone (>6000 mbsl) comprises 1每2% of it [1, 2]. In general, abyssal water and sediments are usually oligotrophic, and physical and chemical conditions (e.g., salinity, tempera- ture, dissolved oxygen, and nutrient concentrations) in hadal water are similar to the overlying abyssal water despite the higher hydrostatic pressure [1每3]. However, cell abundance and microbial carbon turnover rates are sig- ni?cantly higher at hadal trench bottom compared with abyssal plain sediment below the surface layer, while those in outermost surface layer are sometimes comparable between hadal and abyssal sites [4]. This could be hypo- thesized to be attributed to factors apart from the vertical downward ?ux of sinking organic matter (OM) from the ocean surface and hydrostatic pressure.
﹛Hadal zones are generally located in oceanic trenches that are formed along plate boundaries by the movement of oceanic plates, and thus experience episodic and/or regular landslides [5, 6]. These landslides cause downward trans- portation of surface sediments along with relatively fresh OM via the funnel effect of trench geomorphology [7每11]. Moreover, higher sedimentation rates and concentrations of subsea?oor organic compounds in hadal trench bottom sediments compared with neighboring abyssal plain sedi- ments have been reported in multiple trench regions under oligotrophic and eutrophic oceans [4, 11每14]. Therefore, the labile organic carbon deposition in hadal zone supported by the high sedimentation is considered to facilitate establish- ment of distinct faunal and prokaryotic community observed at global scales [15每19]. Recently, the in?uence of physicochemical features on hadal biospheres were reported for microbial communities in the Mariana and Kermadec Trench regions [20, 21], where under oligotrophic and relatively eutrophic (intermediate)  ocean,  respectively [22, 23]; the pioneering studies reported microbial biodi- versity in hadal trench bottom, trench slope, and adjusted abyssal plain sediments using culture-independent high- throughput sequencing techniques, and consequently demonstrated the structural similarity among each abyssal and hadal site. However, relations between geochemistry and microbial composition in hadal trench bottom and adjacent abyssal sediments have been still uninvestigated.
Here, we evaluated prokaryotic community structure in
92 sediment subsamples of 14 sediment cores collected from four hadal trench bottom and seven adjacent abyssal plain sites located in three trenches in the northwest Paci?c Ocean; the Japan, Izu-Ogasawara (Izu-Bonin), and Mariana Trenches (Fig. 1 and Table S1). The Japan and Mariana Trenches lie under eutrophic and oligotrophic oceans, respectively, while the primary productivity of the ocean above the Izu-Ogasawara Trench presents intermediate features. We performed geochemical analyses of the sedi- ments and culture-independent microbial analyses including
direct cell count, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), and tag sequencing for small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) gene, to investigate intra- and inter- trench diversities of prokaryotic communities and potential metabolic interactions using co-occurrence networks. Our analyses illuminated the distinctive prokaryotic assemblages that spread through the trenches in each of abyssal and hadal zones, providing new insights into the microbial ecology in deep ocean, where one of the least understood aquatic habitats.
Materials and methods
Sediment samplings
Sediment cores were collected over ?ve cruises by Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAM- STEC); Research Vessel (R/V) Kairei KR11-11 (December 2011) and KR15-01 (March 2015) cruises and R/V Yoko- suka YK11-06 (September 2011) cruise for the Izu- Ogasawara Trench, R/V Kairei KR12-19  (December 2012) cruise for the Japan Trench, and R/V Kairei KR14-01 cruise (January 2014) for the Mariana Trench (Fig. 1 and Table S1). The water depths ranged from 4700 to 10,902 mbsl. Among the 11 sites, four were located on the hadal trench bottom (※hadal sites§), while the other seven were located on the adjacent abyssal plain (※abyssal sites§).
﹛Sediment cores were obtained by a gravity corer of the remotely operated vehicle (ROV) ※ABISMO§ [24] during KR11-11 and KR15-01 cruises, a free fall 11K lander system [25] during KR11-11, KR12-19, and KR15-01 cruises, a multiple corer system during KR14-01 cruise, and push corers of human occupied vehicle (HOV) ※Shinkai 6500§ during YK11-06 cruise. In each sampling operation, a Conductivity, Temperature, and Depth sensor SBE-19 or SBE-49 (Sea-Bird Electronics, Bellevue, WA, USA) was used. Among the sampling operations, two operations were conducted for sites IO1 and IOC in the Izu-Ogasawara Trench (station pairs IO1-1 and IO1-2, and IOC-1 and IOC- 2, respectively) and site MC in the Mariana Trench (MC-1 and MC-2). Sediment core lengths taken by the push corer, multiple corer, and 11K lander system ranged from 25 to 50 cm, while those collected from IOB and IOC-1 stations using the gravity corer were ~120每150 cm. Note that sediment每water interface of the sediment cores taken by the gravity corer might be more disturbed by sampling opera- tions compared with the other coring systems.
﹛Collected sediment cores were immediately subsampled onboard at 2- to 10-cm-depth intervals for geochemical and microbiology analyses. Porewater was extracted by cen- trifugation at 2600 ℅ g for 10 min, and then supernatant (seawater) was ?ltered using a 0.2-?m syringe cartridge
?lter. Subsamples were stored at ?80 and ?20 ∼C for molecular and geochemical analyses, respectively. Sedi- ment samples for direct cell counting were ?xed with or without  5 mL  formaldehyde  solution  (?nal concentration
2% w/v in PBS buffer) for 1 h at room temperature onboard
attached to the inside of the transparent polycarbonate core liner tube and oxygen concentrations were measured from the outside. The sensors were calibrated with air-saturated and oxygen-free seawater before measurements. Porewater
nutrient concentrations (NO 每, NO 每, PO , and NH +)  were
and stored at ?80 ∼C.
Geochemical analyses
Dissolved oxygen (O2) concentrations in the sediment cores were measured onboard immediately after core recovery using a planar optode oxygen sensor Fibox 3 (PreSens, Regensburg, Germany). For the gravity core samples, small (~3 mm) holes were opened along the side of the core tube at 2每5 cm depth intervals, and the sensor was inserted into the sediments. For sediment cores collected by the push corer, multiple corer, and 11K lander system, the sensor spots were
analyzed spectrophotometrically using an automated continuous-?ow QuAAtro 2-HR analyzer (BL TEC, Osaka, Japan) in an onshore laboratory [26].
﹛Total organic carbon (TOC), total nitrogen (TN), and their C and N isotopic compositions were measured by ?ash combustion with an elemental analyzer Flash EA 1112 ser- ies coupled via Con?oIV to an isotope ratio mass spectro- meter DELTAplus Advantage (Thermo Fisher Scienti?c, Waltham, MA, USA) for KR15-01 sediment samples or DELTA V Advantage (Thermo Fisher Scienti?c) for the other sediment samples. Before measuring, the sediment samples were freeze-dried and acidi?ed with 1 M HCl to
remove inorganic carbon. The decalci?ed sediments were then dried, weighed, and put into precleaned tin cups for ?ash combustion. The stable isotope ratios are reported as 汛 values, in which 汛 = (Rsam/Rstd每1) ℅ 1000, with R being the isotope ratios (either 13C/12C or 15N/14N) in the sample and standard, respectively. The carbon isotope ratio of TOC was referenced against Vienna Pee Dee Belemnite. The nitrogen isotope ratios of TN were referenced against atmospheric N2. The analytical precision achieved through repeated analyses of in-house standards was typically better than  0.2㏑ for both 汛13C and 汛15N.
Cell counting
For determining total cell abundance in sediments collected during KR11-11, KR12-19, and KR14-01 cruises, microbial cells were ?xed with sterile 0.2-?m pre?ltered 3.7% for- maldehyde solution onboard and stored at ?80 ∼C until subsequent processes onshore as follows. The samples were centrifuged, washed with 4.5 mL PBS buffer, and resus- pended in a PBS and 100% ethanol (1:1) mixture. After  sonication using a Branson Soni?er 220 (Danbury, CT, USA), samples were diluted, ?ltered onto 0.2-米m poly- carbonate ?lters, and stained using SYBR Green I. Excess stain was removed three times using 3 mL Milli-Q water, and then ?lters were mounted onto microscope slides and cells were counted under blue light by epi?uorescence microscopy Axioskop 2MOT (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) at ℅1000 magni?cation [27]. For sediments collected from the KR15-01 cruise, frozen samples were suspended in 5 mL PBS containing 4% formaldehyde and incubated at 4 ∼C for 1每2 h. Samples were then centrifuged, repeatedly washed with PBS, resuspended in 5 mL PBS and 100% ethanol (1:1) mixture, and stored at ?20 ∼C. Fixed samples were diluted with PBS and sonicated for 20 s with an ultrasonic homogenizer UH-50 (SMT, Tokyo, Japan). Cells in the aliquant were stained directly using SYBR Green I and counted with an Olympus BX51 ?uorescence micro- scope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) at ℅1500 magni?cation [28]. For each ?lter, at least 400 cells were counted in at least 20 randomly chosen ?elds.
DNA extraction, qPCR, and sequencing
Approximately 5 mL of frozen subsampled sediments from certain cores sections were used for DNA extraction. Environmental DNA was extracted using the PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (Qiagen) with a minor modi?cation to increase DNA yield: cells were shaken for 10 min after incubating at 65 ∼C twice.
﹛The abundance of prokaryotic and archaeal SSU rRNA genes was enumerated by qPCR analyses. Primer and probe sequences and PCR conditions are summarized in Table S2
[29, 30]. SSU rRNA gene copy numbers were quanti?ed as averages of duplicates or triplicates for each sediment sample. For the qPCR analyses, 7500 Real-Time PCR System and StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA) were used. For the pre- paration of qPCR mixtures, qPCR Quick GoldStar Mas- termix Plus (Eurogentec, Seraing, Belgium) and Premix Ex Taq (Perfect Real Time) (Takara Bio, Shiga, Japan) were applied. No ampli?ed products were obtained from Milli-Q water as negative control samples in all ampli?cation trials.
﹛For SSU rRNA gene tag sequencing, the V4每V5 region of SSU rRNA gene was ampli?ed from the environmental DNA assemblages using a primer set of U530F and U907R and LA Taq DNA polymerase with GC buffer (Takara Bio) [31, 32]. Primer sets and PCR conditions are summarized in Table S3. For ampli?cation, Illumina adaptor sequence (ACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT)
and Illumina Multiplexing PCR Primer 2.0 sequence (GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT)
were added to the 5? ends of the primers U530F and U907R, respectively. No ampli?ed products were obtained from Milli-Q water as negative control samples in all ampli?ca- tion trials. The amplicons were mixed with Illumina PhiX control libraries and sequenced by Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) at JAMSTEC. The letter, serial number, ※S,§ and digits for each sample name represent the sampling site, experimental replication (if conducted),  sample   type   (S   for   sediment),   and   upper sediment depth of subsampled layer.
Bioinformatics
For raw sequence data, both ends of reads that contained low- quality bases (Phred quality score < 20) and the adapter sequences were trimmed using TrimGalore (https://github. com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore) with default settings. The remaining pair-end reads were merged with at least 10 bp overlap using FLASH [33] under default settings. Sequencing reads derived from PhiX genome were removed using Bowtie2 [34] using default settings. Chimeric sequences were ?ltered out using UCHIME [35] with default settings, and sequences with low complexity or shorter than 100 bp were discarded using PRINSEQ with -lc_threshold 7 setting. All remaining high-quality sequences were clustered with a 97% identity threshold using VSEARCH [36]. After discarding singletons [37], each cluster was designated as an operational taxonomic unit (OTU). Collector's curve was calculated using RTK [38] with default settings. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis was conducted using Bray每Curtis dissimilarities, and multiresponse permutation procedures (MRPP) test was conducted with 999 permutations and same dissimilarity indices. The taxonomic names of each OTU were systematically assigned using blastn search [39] against
SILVA database release 132 [40] and retrieving the top hit sequence that showed e values ≒ 1E?15.
﹛A network structure of OTU co-occurrence was visua- lized using naive statistical metrics with strict cutoff values to consider a valid co-occurrence event. We used OTUs that represent >0.1% of the total sequencing pool, and pairwise correlations with >0.8 Spearman's correlation coef?cient (老) with Q values < 0.01 after Bonferroni correction; networks involved in more than two OTUs were analyzed.
﹛The 16S rRNA gene sequences of Flavobacteriaceae sp. PRS1 and Thaumarchaeota were retrieved from IMG/M
[41] and SILVA [40] databases, respectively. The sequen- ces of Thaumarchaeota were systematically reduced in family level via similarity-based clustering with 90% identity using VSEARCH [36]. A maximum-likelihood tree was constructed using FastTree2 [42] with GTR + CAT option. Phylogenetic clades of Thaumarchaeota were af?liated following past studies [43, 44].
Data deposition
Amplicon sequence data were deposited into the DDBJ Sequence Read Archive under DRA008185 and DRA008316 (Table S1). All data were registered under BioProject ID PSUB010125.
Results and discussions
Organic geochemistry
TOC and TN in the studied sediments ranged from 0.10 to
3.28 and 0.02 to 0.42 wt%, respectively (Figs. S1 and S2). TOC concentrations were in general lower at the abyssal (0.10每0.55 wt%) than hadal stations (0.29每3.28 wt%), although large  variations were observed  at  the hadal  sta-
in the Mariana Trench sites (0.16每0.59 and 0.02每0.08 wt%, respectively), which differed by an order of magnitude. The C/N ratio was concordant with past observations that con- centrations of protein, carbohydrate, and lipid were gen- erally higher in the Izu-Ogasawara Trench region compared with the Mariana Trench [45]. The 汛15N values of surface sediments may re?ect nutrient availability at the ocean surface due to isotopic fractionation during nutrient con- sumption by phytoplankton [46]; nutrient-rich conditions can lead to lower values (5.1每5.4㏑ and 2.4每8.2㏑ at the Japan and Izu-Ogasawara Trenches, respectively), whereas nutrient-poor conditions cause higher values (8.9每11.7㏑ at the Mariana Trench). Thus, the sedimental OM concentra- tions and traits likely re?ect the different geographical set- tings and productivity of the investigated station. It is generally expected that the organic carbon deposition and subsequent diagenetic process re?ects the surface pro- ductivity of the overlying ocean. The Japan Trench (station JC) is located under the relatively eutrophic north-western Paci?c Ocean, where nutrient-rich Oyashio currents encounter warm Kuroshio currents; In addition, the close distance to Honshu island, Japan, may contribute terrestrial OM to the sea?oor [47, 48]. In contrast, the other stations are located under the oligotrophic Paci?c Ocean, far from continents or large islands. In particular, the Mariana Trench region is located near a subtropical gyre known to have one of the lowest surface ocean productivities [49]. Even if de?nitive conclusions could not be made from the available data, the differences in C/N ratios of each site could re?ect differences in OM sources as well as stable isotopic signatures.
Porewater chemistry
We measured concentrations of dissolved oxygen (O2) and porewater nutrients (NO3每, NO 每, NH +, and PO ) in the
tions. At the abyssal sites, TOC concentrations of the out- ermost layers were 0.42 ㊣ 0.09 wt% (n = 7), and gradually decreased to 0.22 ㊣ 0.10 wt% around 15 cm below sea?oor (cmbsf) (Fig. S1). At the hadal sites TOC concentrations also decreased with sediments depth from 1.39 ㊣ 0.95 wt% (n = 6) at the outermost layers to 0.95 ㊣ 0.61 wt% on average around 15 cmbsf. However, variations between the stations were substantially large and decreasing trend is less clear than abyssal sites. These trends are concordant to the previous ?ndings that reported rapid sediment deposition and burial at hadal trench bottom compared with adjacent abyssal plain [4]. Layers with high TOC concentration were found in JC and IO1-2 hadal cores, which may be explained by event deposit (e.g., [9]).
﹛Among the hadal sites, the highest TOC and TN values were detected in the Japan Trench sites (1.63每3.28 and 0.22每0.42 wt%, respectively) and the lowest were observed
obtained cores (Figs. 2 and S3) to study microbial decom- position of sedimentary OM using oxygen and/or nitrate as electron acceptors [50]. O2 concentrations decreased rapidly with increasing sediment depth in most sediment cores and depleted above 30 cmbsf, whilst those of abyssal cores collected from the Mariana Trench showed moderate decreases. The oxygen concentrations and decreasing trends at the Mariana trench region (~120每180 and 50每150 米M at the abyssal and hadal sites, respectively, in 0每16 cmbsf depth) were generally similar to those previously reported (130每180 and 50每180 米M) [4]. The NO 每 concentrations in outermost layers at all stations except JC were ~35 米M and this was concordant with those in seawater at hadal zone in Izu-Ogasawara [8]. In all hadal cores, NO3每 concentrations drastically decreased with sediment depth to less than 5 米M above 30 cmbsf with a concomitant increase in NH4+ con- centrations, especially at the Japan and Izu-Ogasawara
Trenches. In contrast, no apparent depletion of NO 每 (> 27 米M) and lower NH + concentrations (<11 米M) were observed throughout the sediment depths in all abyssal stations from the Izu-Ogasawara and Mariana Trench regions, which also exhibited low TOC concentrations. Notably, NO ? pro?les showed large variations among hadal sediments compared with abyssal sediments. Among the NO2每 pro?les, clear subsurface peaks up to 6.6 米M were found in only three sediment cores (3, 7, and 7 cmbsf of cores from JC, IO1-1, and IO1-2, respectively). PO4 con- centrations generally increased with sediment depth, except for stations IO1-1 and IO1-2. These pro?les of dissolved oxygen and nitrogen compounds are concordant with pre- vious studies [4, 51]. The pro?les suggested that microbial nitrate respiration was relatively modest in abyssal sedi- ments down to 50 cmbsf, whereas the respiration was active in hadal sediments above 30 cmbsf, probably re?ecting higher concentrations of fresh OM. Interestingly, the increase rate of NH + in hadal sediments along with sedi- ment depth were gradually changed along with latitude of the sites (i.e., higher increasing rates at the northern site (JC) while lower in southern sites (MC-1 and MC-2)), suggestive of variance among stations in microbial populations and functions involved in nitrogen cycles.
Microbial abundances
The direct cell counting and qPCR technique showed similar trends in microbial abundance (Figs. 3 and S4).
Cell abundances by cell counting ranged from 4.2 ℅ 105 to
9.6 ℅ 107 cells/mL sediment, with a general decrease with sediment depth, while scattered pro?les were found in the hadal sites of the Japan and Izu-Ogasawara Trenches (Figs. 3a and S4a). The cell densities were similar to or even higher than those reported in other works [4, 52]. Cell abundances in the hadal stations were generally higher than those in the adjacent abyssal stations. When comparing maximum cell abundances between cores, the largest and smallest cell abundances in hadal sites were found in the Japan and Mariana Trenches, respectively; for abyssal sites, abundance at the Izu-Ogasawara Trench was larger than that of the Mariana Trench. For qPCR analysis, the copy numbers of prokaryotic and archaeal SSU rRNA gene  in  each  station ranged from 3.4 ℅ 105 to
3.0 ℅ 109 and 9.9 ℅ 104 to 5.7 ℅ 108 copies/mL sediment, respectively (Figs. 3b and S4b). In addition, in the Mariana Trench region only, copy numbers from the shallow abyssal sediments were higher than those from the hadal sediments. The SSU rRNA gene copy numbers were 2每197-fold higher than the cell abundances by direct counting method, likely resulting from biases associated with direct cell counting (e.g., staining) [28] and mole- cular analyses (e.g., primers, probes, extracellular DNA, and/or SSU rRNA gene copy numbers on prokaryotic genomes [53, 54]. However, cell abundance and SSU rRNA gene copy number was signi?cantly correlated  (Fig. S5). Interestingly, the ratio of archaea to prokaryotes rapidly decreased at approximately under 20 cmbsf of the
hadal cores, while higher values were observed through the vertical pro?le in abyssal cores (Figs. 3c and S4c), which may be explained by lower nutrient availability in abyssal than hadal sites. Overall, these trends were con- sistent with previous studies [4, 52, 55, 56], supporting more vigorous microbial activity in hadal trench bottom sediments, especially in the subsurface under 5 cmbsf.
OTU-level compositions of microbial communities in sediment samples
Based on the geochemical pro?les in sediments, especially dissolved oxygen and nitrate concentrations, we selected four to ten layers from each sediment core for SSU rRNA gene tag sequencing. A total of 8,286,508 high-quality SSU
rRNA gene sequences with 414 bp average length were  obtained from the 92 sediment subsamples. The sequences comprised of 80,478 OTUs with 1587每13,181 (5478 aver- age) OTUs per sample (Table S1). A number of OTU per sample were similar to or even higher than those reported in previous studies [21, 57]. Based on rarefaction curves, the obtained OTUs in each sediment sample well represented their microbial communities (Fig. S6).
﹛To investigate compositional similarity between samples, we performed OTU-based NMDS analysis. OTU compo- sitions were related to water depth (Fig. 4a) and generally similar along with sediment cores at each station (Fig. 4b). The OTU compositions were signi?cantly differed between the abyssal and hadal sediments (A = 0.11, p < 0.001, MRPP) (Fig. 4c) and structured along the stations (A = 0.31, p < 0.001) (Fig. 4d). Signi?cant associations were also observed with each of the pair of trench and zonation. (A = 0.21, p < 0.001) (Fig. 4e). Unexpectedly, the compositions in the abyssal sediments from the Izu-Ogasawara and Mariana Trench regions largely overlapped. The separation among the hadal sediments related with the different depression trends in porewater nitrate, TOC, and TN con- centrations, but little with porewater oxygen concentration and cell abundance (Fig. S7).
﹛Vertical pro?les of community diversity in the hadal sediment cores were distinct from those of the abyssal cores (Fig. S8). The Shannon, Simpson, and Chao1 index values of all abyssal cores gradually decreased with sediment
depth, while those in hadal samples ?uctuated. Overall, the Shannon and Chao index values in the upper most layers at the abyssal stations were higher than those at the hadal stations.  In  hadal  cores,  index  values  were  decreased at
~5每20 cmbsf and retained or increased below these layers. In all hadal cores from the Izu-Ogasawara Trench, the Shannon index plot showed clear peaks at 8每25 cmbsf and the values were higher than those of the most surface layers. Conversely, in hadal cores from the Mariana Trench, the index values were slightly increased in deep sediment sec- tions (>10 cmbsf), indicating that peaks were possibly located in layers deeper than 30 cmbsf. Interestingly, the diversity was decreased at layers close to those where depletion of oxygen and nitrate occurred (Fig. 2). These trends were concordant with the scattered microbial cell abundances observed in most of the hadal sediments in contrast to the abyssal sediments (Fig. 3). However, those trends were opposed to the general trends that prokaryotic growth and bioactivity are restricted according to sediment depth in energy-limited subsea?oor sediments [48, 58, 59]. Thus, those trends of microbial diversity and cell abundance should be a unique feature of hadal subsurface biosphere. In the cases of gut and freshwater environments, it has been discussed that the supply of fresh nutrient resources gen- erally correlate with microbial  biomass  and  diversity  [60, 61]. According to the proposed theory, the feature of the hadal subsurface biosphere also could be explained by nutrient   supply  (i.e.,  the   deposition  of  relatively  fresh
organic compounds with high sedimentation rate as dis- cussed above). Besides, recent deposition of sediments via landslide could be other potential source of microbial cells that lead to varying diversity with sediment depth.
Taxonomic composition of microbial communities in sediment samples
Among the retrieved OTUs, 76,881 (99.7%) were tax- onomically assigned to eleven Bacterial and two Archaeal phyla. Only 153 OTUs were assigned to Eukarya and the remaining 243 OTUs were taxonomically unassigned. The top  three  and  ten  most  abundant  phyla  accounted  for
>58% and >88%, respectively, of the sequence pool of all sediment samples. The most abundant OTU in the sequencing   pool   belonged  to   Thaumarchaeota, which
represent seven of the top ten OTUs (Fig. S9 and Sup- plementary Data 1).
﹛Overall, Thaumarchaeota (average 23.8%) was the most abundant phylum, followed by Proteobacteria (23.7%), Planctomycetes (10.6%), Chloro?exi (9.6%), Bacteroidetes
(8.0%), Nanoarchaeaeota (6.2%), Acidobacteria (2.5%), Candidatus (Ca.) Atribacteria (1.7%), and Ca. Mar- inimicrobia (1.7%) (Fig. 5). Within sequencing reads assigned to Nanoarchaeaeota, 99.6% were assigned to class Woesearchaeia, currently proposed as novel phylum Ca. Woesearchaeota. Thus, we assigned Nanoarchaeaeota as Woesearchaeota in this study. Within Proteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria (10.3%) is the most abundant class, followed by Alphaproteobacteria (8.4%) and Deltaproteo- bacteria (5.1%) (Fig. S10). In general, the dominant phyla were similar to those of previous studies of abyssal and
hadal sediments [20, 21, 52, 57, 62每64]. The most abundant OTU within Eukarya belonged to Alveolata (41.5%), fol- lowed by Stramenopiles (21.0%), Nucletmycea (19.4%),
Holozoa (11.7%), and Rhizaria (2.2%).
﹛Although dominant phyla were shared among sub- samples within each of the sediment cores, their relative abundance gradually changed with sediment depth (Fig. 5). The relative abundances of Chloro?exi, Woesearchaeota, and Marinimicrobia generally increased in deeper sections (e.g., >8 cmbsf in IO1-2 and >2.5 cmbsf in IOC-2) along with the gradual decreases in oxygen and nitrate con- centrations (Fig. 2). Conversely, Proteobacteria and Thau- marchaeota dominated in shallower sections (e.g., 0每7 cmbsf in IO1-2 and 0每22 cmbsf in MC-2). These trends are similar to previous studies [20, 21, 52, 57, 62, 63] and likely depend on the concentrations of dissolved oxygen and nitrate in sediments. Supporting this, correlation analysis between taxa and geochemistry showed that the abundances of Proteobacteria and Thaumarchaeota were signi?cantly positively correlated with oxygen and nitrate concentra- tions, respectively (Fig. S11 and Supplementary Data 2). Woesearchaeota has been detected from diverse benthic and anaerobic environments [54, 65每68] and harbors genomic capability for fermentation-based metabolism [69]; hence, they may contribute to anaerobic carbon and hydrogen cycles in the deep sea?oor sediments.
﹛We also observed some notable differences in prokar- yotic communities likely associated with geographical location. Distinct community compositions were observed in station JC; Bacteroidetes dominated the communities (average 33.7%), while Thaumarchaeota was relatively scarce (4.1%). Within the Bacteroidetes, Flavobacteriaceae (belonging to class Flavobacteriia) is the most abundant family. The Flavobacterial OTUs abundant in station JC showed low similarity (88.0每91.4%) against Flavobacter- iaceae sp. PRS1, whose genome was reconstructed from the Maria Trench water sample via single cell technique [56]. Because members of Flavobacteriia were reported to be abundant in eutrophic oceans [70], our results likely re?ect eutrophic productivity in the Japan Trench. The pre- dominance of phyla Atribacteria was found  only  in  deeper sections of IO1-1 (15每29 cmbsf), IO1-2 (8每25 cmbsf), and IOC-1 (20每155 cmbsf) hadal stations at the Izu- Ogasawara Trench. Atribacteria is a common lineage in organic rich anaerobic sediments and probably grow with fermentation [71每73]. The higher abundances of Flavo- bacteriia and Atribacteria may represent a substantial deposition of degradable organic compounds into hadal sediments.
﹛The substantial differences revealed in the taxonomic analysis may also be explained by the geomorphological variations among sampling stations. Marinimicrobia showed signi?cant unevenness between cores, with higher
abundances observed in hadal (2.6%) verses abyssal sedi- ments (0.73%) (p < 0.05, U-test, Bonferroni correction). Marinimicrobia is known to be a dominant population in deep sea sediments and seawater, especially in oxygen- minimum zones, and harbors genetic potential of diverse energy metabolic processes using sulfur and nitrogenous compounds as electron donor and acceptor [74每78]. In contrast, Ca. Schekmanbacteria was detected in all abyssal samples (average 0.82%), while there was signi?cantly lower abundance (0.007%) in hadal samples (p < 0.05, U- test, Bonferroni correction). Although several draft gen- omes of the recently proposed phyla Schekmanbacteria were reconstructed by metagenomic approach [79], their biological and geochemical importance remains unclear.
﹛The relative abundance of Thaumarchaeota showed drastic decrease in hadal stations below 6每15 and 20每30 cmbsf in core(s) from the Izu-Ogasawara (IO1-1, IO1-2, IOC-1, and IOC-2) and Mariana (MC-2) Trenches, respectively, where nitrate was consumed and ammonium emerged (Fig. 2). In contrast, low abundance of Thau- marchaeota was continuously observed in sediments from the Japan Trench (JC), where nitrate concentration was depleted through the sediment core (Fig. 2). This was concordant with qPCR analyses (Fig. 3c), as well as pre- vious observations that Thaumarchaeota frequently domi- nated in aerobic sediment columns and radially decreased across the oxic每anoxic transition layer [63, 80]. The most predominant family of Thaumarchaeota in the sediments was Nitrosopumilaceae (92%), which are known to be ammonia oxidizing archaea (AOA) [81每83], and thus may contribute markedly to nitri?cation processes in trench surface sediments. The co-existence of Thaumarchaeota and Marinimicrobia at relatively high abundance suggests the co-existence of nitri?cation and denitri?cation processes, respectively, as described previously [52, 84]. Although abundance of functional genes related with nitri?cation (e.g., amoA) was not analyzed in this study, we should note that abundance of the amoA gene decreased with sediment depth in trench bottom sediments from the Mariana and Izu- Ogasawara Trenches [52, 84].
Co-occurrence network structure of OTUs
Many prokaryotic lineages are known to establish consortia with speci?c prokaryotic members, who inhabit same environment and sometimes sharing similar ecological niches and biological interactions (e.g., sharing metabolic compounds via ?xation and translocating process) [85]. Since co-occurrence patterns can be useful for revealing such concrete but mostly hidden relationships from com- plex community datasets, co-occurrence network analyses have been widely applied to various SSU rRNA tag sequencing datasets of marine and other environments [86每
89]. Here, we conducted co-occurrence analysis to under- stand core metabolic interactions among microbes in trench subsea?oor sediments.
﹛The co-occurrence network showed six clusters com- posed of 3每36 OTUs (66 OTUs in total) and 2每247 edges (Fig. 6). The 66 OTUs represented 23.6% of community compositions in each sample on average. Interestingly, most subnetworks linked to oceanographic zonation (i.e., abyssal and hadal) and sediment depth (Fig. 7 and Supplementary Data 3); OTUs belonging to the largest group A (composed of two subgroups A-1 and A-2) were abundantly detected in the abyssal sediments through the Izu-Ogasawara and Mariana trenches, whilst abundance OTUs in other groups were higher in hadal sediments (i.e., under 10 cmbsf for group B, in shallow sections (0每30 cmbsf) for group C, and above 6 cmbsf for group D). The members of groups E and F were detected from both abyssal and hadal cores.
Although OTUs of groups C and F were spread among the three trenches, those of groups B, D, and E were rare in cores from the Japan Trench.
﹛Groups A and D were dominated by OTUs assigned to order Nitrosopumilales (Fig. S12). Nitrosopumilales are considered as aerobic nitrifying [81每83], and abundance of these OTUs were concordant with the high oxygen and nitrate concentrations in the sediments (Fig. 2). OTUs of group D belonged to one small clade (showing 95.6每96.1% identity with 16S rRNA gene of Nitrosopumilus maritimus SCM1 [DQ085097]) while those of group A were spread throughout the order. The niche separation of AOA sub- groups is regulated by the availability of electron donors like ammonia [19, 90, 91]. Supporting this, the dominance of the group D clade (up to 78.1% in Thaumarchaeota in the hadal samples) is consistent with the enrichment of labile OM in the hadal sediments. Unfortunately, further subgroup
assignment of Thaumarchaeota OTUs using short 16S rRNA gene tag sequences were not technically feasible in contrast to the previously described amoA gene [43]. Although most proteobacterial OTUs in group A were assigned to lineages that currently less well-understood, two OTUs were assigned to genus Woeseia in Chromatiales; this genus likely possesses denitri?cation pathway-related genes [92], and may consume nitrates that provided by nitri?ers including Thaumarchaeota.
﹛Intriguingly, group B consisted of 13 OTUs belonging to ?ve phyla (Planctomycetes, Atribacteria, Chloro?exi, Bac- teroidetes, and Ca. Aerophobetes), and OTUs were abun- dant in the deeper sections where oxygen and nitrate were depleted (Fig. 2). All 13 OTUs showed highest sequence
similarities with uncultured lineages, most of which were found in anaerobic environments with low oxygen con- centrations. Atribacteria partake in fermentation metabo- lisms that produce acetate, hydrogen and carbon dioxide [71每73]. Similar to Atribacteria, recently de?ned bacterial phylum Aerophobetes were reported to harbor saccharolytic and fermentative metabolism capabilities [93]. All Planc- tomycetes OTUs were assigned to order MSBL9. Meta- genome sequencing analyses identi?ed genes encoding pyruvate formate-lyase from a member of MSBL9 [94], indicative of fermentation capabilities. All three Chloro?exi OTUs were assigned to class Dehalococcoidia, which is frequently detected from sea?oor sediments and possesses genes related to hydrogen and sulfur compound oxidation
with reductive dehalogenation of halogenated organic compounds [95每97]. Notably, MSBL9 and Dehalococcoi- dia possess potential of ?avin secretion in marine sediments [98], implying that these lineages also contribute to main- taining extracellular metabolite pools in hadal sediments. The single Bacteroidetes OTU was af?liated with class BD2-2, which may interact with methanotrophic archaea and sulfate-reducing bacteria in methane seep sediments [99]. While knowledge of group B OTUs is still limited, they may cooperatively establish anaerobic metabolic net- works; e.g. products of fermentation by Atribacteria, Aerophobetes, and MSBL9 are used as electron donors by BD2-2 and Dehalococcoidia OTUs, and then the fresh labile OM will be used as energy resources again in hadal sedi- ments following necromass turnover recycling, as discussed previously [100].
﹛Overall, the network structure analyses highlighted associations between prokaryotic consortia and geochem- ical conditions (geomorphological zonation and sediment depth). Part of these consortia may represent potential metabolic interactions with habitat transition, although further experimental validation should be required. In addition, the consortia structures were widespread among the trenches in the northwest Paci?c Ocean. While three groups (B, C, and D) were selectively abundant in the hadal sediments, only one group (A) showed high preference in the abyssal sediments (Fig. 7).
Factors impacting hadal subsea?oor ecosystem
Here, we conducted culture-independent molecular analyses of trans-trench prokaryotic communities in the abyssal plain and hadal trench bottom sediments collected from three  different trench systems under different oceanographical settings to understand the general role of hadal environ- ments on subsurface geochemical cycles and microbial ecosystems. Microbial cell abundance showed greater bio- mass in the hadal sediments verses abyssal sediments especially in deeper layers, which is consistent with pre- vious studies [4, 52, 55]. Although we cannot exclude an impact of water pressure on benthic microbes [101], the clear relations between geochemistry and microbial com- munity at the hadal sediments likely indicating more importance of factors related to geomorphology rather than merely water pressure. Overall, the microbial composition suggested that development of prokaryotic communities depends on ocean geomorphological zonation (i.e., abyssal vs. hadal), geographic regionality (i.e., productivity of overlying ocean surface), and factors associated with sedi- ment depth. We also observed different vertical ?uctuation of microbial community diversity between the hadal and abyssal sediments and identi?ed potential prokaryotic con- sortia that spread among inter每trenches habitats and likely
share energy-conserving metabolic processes in both abys- sal and hadal sediments.
﹛In general, deposition of OM and subsurface microbial cell abundance is related to productivity of the surface ocean and distance from continents or islands [48]. Indeed, in our abyssal sites, greater microbial cell abundance and oxygen consumption were observed in the Izu-Ogasawara compared with Mariana trench regions (Figs. 2 and 3). However, microbial compositions and some geochemical parameters (nitrate, TOC, and TN) were unexpectedly similar between these two regions, indicating that the impact of surface productivity on subsurface microbial community is much smaller than expected in the abyssal plains under oligotrophic to ultraoligotrophic oceans. In the hadal sites, we found variations in geochemical parameters, cell abundances, and microbial compositions along with surface productivities. The differences between the abyssal and hadal sediments cannot only be explained by the ver- tical ?ux of sinking organic particles in?uenced by the ocean surface productivity. To explain the variations, we have two hypotheses. One of them is a presence of hadal currents that could supply intrinsic OM on hadal sites apart from those sinking directly from ocean surface. The other is a difference in sedimentation rates between hadal and abyssal sites that change the impact of ocean surface pro- ductivity on subsurface microbes.
﹛Lateral transport along the trenches is one of the possible sources of OM in hadal trench bottom sediments apart from sinking OM. There are north- and south-ward currents along the trench axis at the Izu-Ogasawara and Japan Trenches, respectively [102, 103]. These currents may contribute to transportation of suspended particles with relatively high OM contents from the north to south. A part of the latitu- dinal gradients in TOC values among hadal sites (Fig. S1) could be explained either by this lateral OM supply, or benthic microbial populations that prefer subsurface eco- systems under eutrophic oceans represented by Atribacteria (Fig. 5). However, we could not ?nd clear geochemical signatures supporting OM delivery along the trenches. Also such currents may contribute for microbial dispersal, growing up the importance to elucidate the water current in abyssal and hadal zones.
﹛OM degradation process at the surface sediments may differ between hadal and abyssal sites due to differences in sedimentation rates, which are very high at hadal while low at abyssal sites. Extremely high sedimentation rates at hadal trench bottom, driven by landslides on trench slope via the funnel effect, cause the rapid deposition of labile OM into the subsurface [9, 55]. This burial prevents oxidative degradation of OM at surface sediments, allowing semi- labile OM to be available to subsurface microbes. In con- trast, abyssal plains generally have slower sedimentation rates. In our studied Izu-Ogasawara Trench sites, estimated
sedimentation rates were 25 and 2.9 cm per 1000 years at the hadal (IOC-2) and abyssal (IOA) stations, respectively, based on bulk 14C-age analysis (Nomaki et al. unpublished data). The slower sedimentation rates at abyssal sites have allowed continuous oxic degradation of OM at surface sediments for over 1000 years, and labile OM are likely more diminished than those at hadal sites. Consequently, the differences in TOC concentrations (0.11每0.55%) were small across the abyssal plains in our sites, while those at the hadal sites varied substantially (0.16每3.28%) (Fig. S1). The variations in TOC concentration among the hadal trench bottom sediments subsequently in?uenced the dis- solved oxygen and nitrate pro?les through sediment depths (Fig. 2). Higher diversity of microbial communities among hadal than abyssal sediments (Fig. 4c) may re?ect variations in TOC and porewater chemistries. Moreover, the differ- ences in labile OM deposition may be re?ected in the microbial cell abundance in the abyssal stations (Fig. 3) instead of microbial community structures.
﹛Our ?ndings provide new perspectives into hadal bio- spheres under different oceanographic regions, displaying contrasting properties to abyssal biospheres. We also iden- ti?ed novel insights into abyssal geochemistry and micro- bial communities whereby variations in surface productivity at abyssal sites are not profound in oligotrophic to ultra- oligotrophic areas because the OM buried into subsurface sediments are extensively degraded before burial. However, we could not specify the factors controlling microbial ecosystems and biogeochemical cycles in this study. To further understand such controlling factors, investigation of microbiological processes in intra- and inter-cell scales and elucidation of biological mechanisms of trench systems that impact hadal biospheres are necessary. In addition, ecolo- gical functions and phylogenetic classi?cations of most predominant lineages in deep sea?oor sediments remain largely unknown. Also, it should be noted that there is still dif?culties in estimation of de?nitive phylogenetic and functional characters in genus or strain level based on the partial SSU rRNA gene sequencing reads. Moreover, although bacteria and archaea may account for a major part of ecosystems, viruses could facilitate biogeochemical cycles through biological interactions with prokaryotes in oligotrophic deep sea environment [100, 104每106]. There- fore, further taxonomic composition analyses, gene- and genome-centric approaches (e.g., metagenomics, metatran- scriptomics, and metaepigenomics [107]), and integrative analyses with viruses (e.g., viromics) will provide further insights into microbial ecology and associated biogeo- chemical cycles.
