Evidence of fluid seepage in Gronfjorden, Spitsbergen: Implications from an integrated acoustic study of seafloor morphology, marine sediments and tectonics
ABSTRACT
This study integrates high-resolution surface and sub-surface geophysical data to investigate possible fluid (gas and/or liquids) migration pathways to the seafloor in Gr?nfjorden, west Spitsbergen. Gr?nfjorden is an N-S aligned tributary fjord, located in the western part of the Isfjorden fjord system. Pockmarks were identified on the bathymetric data in the southern and northern parts of the fjord. Three types of shallow seep-related acoustic features have been identified in the marine sediments: i) enhanced reflections, ii) acoustic turbid zones, and iii) acoustic blankings. They occur beneath some of the pockmarks and circular patches of high-backscatter on the seafloor in the central part of the fjord, which are potential seep-related seafloor features. 6每8 km long NNWSSE striking ridges have been identified in the southern part of the study area. Thrust faults were interpreted on 2Dmultichannel seismic data truncating the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous successions of western Isfjorden, located north of Gr?nfjorden. A possible link has been found between these fault systems and the seafloor ridges which strike in a similar direction. Further, a normal fault has been identified within the shallow marine sediments which drapes the bedrock of the fjord. The fractured bedrock of the fjord and faults associated with the West Spitsbergen fold-and-thrust belt could possibly represent major conduits for fluid migration from deeper stratigraphy to shallow marine sediments and the seafloor.
1. INTRODUCTION
Integrated analysis (geophysical, geochemical and geotechnical) of shallow sub-surface fluids is important for risk assessment of marine geo-hazards, localizing hydrocarbon reservoirs and identification of shallow and deep source rocks (Hovland and Judd, 1988; Hovland et al., 2002; Ostanin et al., 2013). In this paper, ＆fluid＊ means both the liquid and gaseous phases, including pore-water with dissolved gas and/or dispersed gas bubbles (when the pore-water is supersaturated with gas). Fluids from deep and shallow sources can migrate along faults to the seafloor, where features like pockmarks, mud volcanoes or carbonate mounds are formed (Ligtenberg, 2005; Judd and Hovland, 2007; Sahling et al., 2008; L?seth et al., 2009; Barnard et al., 2015). The distribution of these various types of seep features on the seafloor depends on the location and geometry of underlying reservoirs, geological unconformities and seal bypass systems (faults and intrusions) which act as fluid migration pathways (Ligtenberg, 2005; Cartwright et al., 2007; Gay et al., 2007; Judd and Hovland, 2007; Chand et al., 2012; Ostanin et al., 2013).
Several studies have documented seabed fluid flow, seepage features, occurrence of gas hydrates, and associated slope failures in the Norwegian Sea, Barents Sea and the West Spitsbergen continental margin (Plaza-Faverola et al., 2011; Vadakkepuliyambatta et al., 2013; Dumke et al., 2016). Gas flares in the water column of southwest and west of Spitsbergen have been reported by Damm et al. (2005) and Westbrook et al. (2009). Near-surface hydrocarbon anomalies suggest mixed biogenic and thermogenic gases in the fjords and shelf sediments of west Spitsbergen (Knies et al., 2004).
Pockmarks associated with possible shallow gas occurrences have been previously described in Isfjorden (Forwick et al., 2009; Roy et al., 2014). Gr?nfjorden is located in the western part of the main Isfjorden fjord system in Spitsbergen, where the largest pockmark has been reported (Roy et al., 2015). However, shallow gas-related acoustic anomalies and the influence of regional geology on focused fluid flow associated with the pockmarks in Gr?nfjorden have not been studied so far. The objective of this paper is to investigate the sub-surface fluid occurrences, seafloor seepage features and processes in order to better understand how they are connected to the complex deeper geological setting in Gr?nfjorden. This study uses high-resolution multibeam bathymetric and backscatter data, shallow sub-bottom acoustic data and multichannel 2D seismic data to investigate the seafloor seeps, sub-surface fluid occurrences and their link to underlying tectonic and structural features.
2. REGIONAL SETTING
Gr?nfjorden is located 9 km southeast of the mouth of the Isfjorden fjord system in west Spitsbergen (Fig. 1). The mouth of Isfjorden was deglaciated c. 12,300 calendar years BP (Mangerud et al., 1992). The glacigenic stratigraphic units blanketing the bedrock of Gr?nfjorden have been described in Fig. 4C of Forwick and Vorren (2010), comprising subglacial, glacier frontal, and glacimarine deposits. Sedimentary sources to these deposits are the valley glaciers terminating along the southern-southwestern coast of Gr?nfjorden (Fig. 2A). The river Gr?ndalselva has deposited fluvial to paralic sediments along the central- eastern coast of the fjord (Fig. 3). Restricted water exchange and high sedimentation rates have the potential to result in anoxic bottom water conditions in Arctic fjords like Gr?nfjorden (Howe et al., 2010).
The tectonic setting of Gr?nfjorden is in the frontal syncline of a major regional monocline of the WSFTB (Ohta et al., 1992; Braathen et al., 1995) (Fig. 2). This major structure shows faults, mostly low angle to bedding and some steeply dipping, likely related to thrusting. On a small scale, extensional and shear fractures have been found in the Mesozoic and Cenozoic sedimentary sequences (Braathen and Bergh, 1995; Teyssier et al., 1995). A distinct NNW-SSE strike characterizes the thick-skinned basement-involved fold-thrust complex in the study area (Braathen and Bergh, 1995; Bergh et al., 1997). However, the Isfjorden-Ymerbukta fault has an NE-SW trend offsetting the fold complex dextrally (Braathen et al., 1999) (Fig. 3).
The onshore bedrock succession is dominated by the Paleocene Firkanten Formation and the Cretaceous Carolinefjellet and Helvetiafjellet formations on both sides of Gr?nfjorden. The Firkanten Formation consists of sandstone and some shale with intervening coal layers (Steel et al., 1981; Dallmann, 1999). Belowthis, the Carolinefjellet and Helvetiafjellet formations are overlying the Janusfjellet Subgroup (Ohta et al., 1992; Braathen and Bergh, 1995) (Fig. 2B). The Aptian- Albian Carolinefjellet Formation is subdivided into five members according to the predominance of shales, siltstones or sandstones, and correlates with Kolmule Formation of the Barents Shelf (Dallmann, 1999). The Helvetiafjellet Formation consists of 50每100mof largely fluvial sandstones and shales, possessing good reservoir potential in the Barents Sea (Edwards, 1979; Midtkandal et al., 2007; Gjelberg and Steel, 2012). The underlying Middle Jurassic坼Lower Cretaceous Janusfjellet Subgroup is c. 400 m thick shaly unit (Dypvik et al., 1991). The Middle Triassic每Jurassic Kapp Toscana Group (c. 475 m) and Sassendalen Group (c. 700 m) consist of sandstone intercalated with thin shale layers and thick shaly layers intercalated with sandstone and siltstones, respectively (Dallmann, 1999). The organic rich rocks in the study area are the black paper shales of the Middle Triassic Botneheia Formation andMiddle Jurassic坼Lower Cretaceous Janusfjellet Subgroup (M?rk and Bjor?y, 1984; Dypvik, 1985; Bjor?y et al., 2010) (Fig. 4).
3. DATA AND METHODS
This study uses multibeam backscatter and bathymetric data, shallow sub-bottom acoustic profiles and deep 2D multichannel seismic data. ArcGIS and Petrel software were used to interpret, integrate and correlate seafloor and sub-surface features on different geophysical data sets, ultimately offering a 3D platform for a coupled sub-surface to seafloor analysis.
3.1. Multibeam data
The high-resolution multibeam swath bathymetric data were collected with a 95 kHz Kongsberg Maritime EM1002 multibeam echo sounder by the Norwegian Hydrographic Service in 2008 (Figs. 2A and 3). In addition to this, multibeam backscatter data were collected using a Kongsberg Maritime EM300 multibeam echo sounder operating at a frequency of 30 kHz, onboard RV Helmer Hanssen in 2010 (Fig. 3). CTD measurements were done at the mouth and center of the fjord in order to calculate the velocity profile (1464每1472 m/s) in thewater column. References to ※backscatter§ throughout the paper should be regarded as relative backscatter strength. The processed backscatter and bathymetric data were gridded with 0.6 m and 5 m horizontal cell size respectively using IVS 3D Fledermaus v.7.0 software.
3.2. Sub-bottom acoustic data
The shallow high-resolution seismic data were acquired with a 4kW EM3300 hull-mounted sub-bottom profiler on the RV Helmer Hanssen in 2010 (Fig. 1). This instrument uses a frequency range of 2每16 kHz that allows a vertical resolution of 6每10 cm. The sub-bottom acoustic profiles could image the marine sediment layers to a maximum depth of c. 20每25 m below the fjord seafloor. Edgetech Discoverer II software was used for visual interpretation of stratigraphic units and acoustic anomalies related to possible shallow gas occurrences.
3.3. 2D multichannel seismic data 
The conventional 2D multichannel marine seismic data were acquired in Isfjorden by Statoil in 1985 and 1988 using 2400 and 3000 m long streamers, respectively, and 25 m between shot-points (Fig. 1). Acquisition and processing parameters of the 2D seismic surveys (ST8515 and ST8815) are provided in B?lum and Braathen (2012) and Blinova et al. (2012). Due to the large variations in 2D data quality in the western part of Isfjorden, interpretation of the seismic data is problematic. The poor reflectivity (diffuse nature), continuity and undulating nature of the reflections has been attributed to the hard sea floor combined with high velocity rocks and complex structural setting of the WSFTB in this area (Braathen et al., 1995; Bergh et al., 1997; B?lum and Braathen, 2012; Blinova et al., 2013) (Fig. 4B). Acoustic penetration is c. 3每4 s TWT (two-way-travel time), which is equivalent to c. 7每9 km depth (using Vp values provided in B?lum and Braathen (2012)). The structural interpretation of the seismic data was donewith Petrel software.
4. RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION
4.1. Bathymetric data: seafloor morphology and evidence of seepage
4.1.1. Observations
The seafloor of Gr?nfjorden is relatively smooth, as compared to some of the other tributary fjords of the Isfjorden fjord system (Ottesen and Dowdeswell, 2006; Baeten et al., 2010; Roy et al., 2015). The water depth varies from 15 m at the head to 190 m at the mouth of the fjord. The central part is occupied by a 1.7 km wide and 6.6 km long basin with a maximum water depth of 150 m (Fig. 2A). The northern part of the fjord is characterized by a 5.8 km2 plateau, with a relief of 16每20m(Fig. 2A). A 1.5 km long transverse ridge with a relief of 2每12m (from E toW) is located 100m south of this plateau. The southern part of the fjord is characterized by 6每8 km long, parallel to sub-parallel ridges with a relief of 2每60 m, and oriented along NNW-SSE direction (Fig. 2A).
19 circular depressions (100每240 m diameter and 6每10 m deep) have been observed in the northern part of the fjord. The circular depressions do not have raised rims, but their edges are sharply defined. Their slope changes from horizontal to an estimated 20每30∼ within a distance of 0.5每1 m. Some of these have been previously described by Forwick et al. (2009) and Roy et al. (2015). Smaller circular depressions (20每60mdiameter and b3mdeep) have been observed in the southern part of the fjord (Fig. 3). There are no circular depressions in the central basin.
4.1.2. Interpretation
Fluid escape from the seafloor lifts the fine sediments into suspension, and then the suspended fine sediments get redistributed by near-bottom currents, resulting in the formation of circular depressions in the seafloor. These circular depressions are termed as pockmarks (King and MacLean, 1970),which provide evidence of fluid escape. Subglacial landforms are not well preserved in the present day seafloor of Gr?nfjorden, presumably due to the thick postglacial sediment cover in the fjord originating from the glaciers and rivers draining into the fjord (Forwick and Vorren, 2010). Geological maps and cross-sections from the northern part of the fjord show slivers of Paleocene bedrock on either sides of the fjord and a distinct syncline-anticline pair (Ohta et al., 1992; Braathen and Bergh, 1995) (Fig. 2A). The fold in the Paleocene succession coincides with the extent of the plateau on the fjord seafloor, suggesting that Paleocene rocks probably make up the bedrock of the plateau. The E-W striking transverse ridge located 100msouth of the plateau has been interpreted as a thrust moraine based on its orientation perpendicular to ice-flow direction and acoustic facies analysis (Forwick and Vorren, 2010) (Fig. 2A). The sub-parallel ridges oriented NNW-SSE in the southern part of the fjord coincide with the alignment of the steeply dipping Upper Jurassic坼Lower Cretaceous successions and thrust faults observed in the northern part of the study area and adjacent onshore bedrocks (Ohta et al., 1992; Braathen et al., 1995; Bergh et al., 1997; Blinova et al., 2012) (Figs. 2 and 3). Hence, it is suggested that these ridges probably relate to steeply dipping competent Late Mesozoic layers and/or thrust faults of the WSFTB.
4.2. Seafloor backscatter data: anomalies related to possible seepage
4.2.1. Observations
The seafloor acoustic backscatter data in Gr?nfjorden has values ranging from ?6.38 to ?54.88 dB (Fig. 3). In general, the western part of the fjord has higher backscatter values compared to the eastern part. But in particular, high backscatter values are observed in the center of deep pockmark depressions in the northern part (Fig. 5B and C). In addition, 16 circular patches (40每70 m diameter) of relatively high backscatter values (?19 to ?23 dB with a background value of c. ?30 dB) are observed in the central basin, which are devoid of pockmark depressions (Figs. 3, 6B and C).
4.2.2. Interpretation 
Acoustic backscatter intensity is a function of sea bottom character (mostly roughness and sediment type) (Borgeld et al., 1999; Urgeles et al., 2002; Collier and Brown, 2005). Variable grain size distribution, porosity, presence of gas, and bioturbation can influence the seafloor roughness and backscatter character resulting in anomalous backscatter values. For example, Hovland (1990) found higher acoustic reflectivity of the seafloor sediments where gas was present immediately below the seafloor.
The localized high-backscatter values observed in the center of the pockmark depressions in Gr?nfjorden (Fig. 5B and C), are interpreted to be caused by coarse sediments, which are expected to be present inside the pockmarks due to winnowing of fine grained sediments. High reflectivity from authigenic mineral precipitates associated with fluid seepage could also be a possible reason for such results, as observed in other settings (Judd and Hovland, 2007; Naudts et al., 2008; Dandapath et al., 2010).
It is suspected that the circular patches (pockmark-like) of high-backscatter in the central basin could possibly relate to precipitates following diffuse fluid seepage from the seafloor (Fig. 6B). Similar high-backscatter anomalies have been attributed to authigenic carbonates which are formed due to oxidation of seeping methane in other offshore settings (Orange et al., 2002; Sahling et al., 2008; Ivanov et al., 2010). However, bioturbation induced roughness could also have an influence on the backscatter strength at these suspected seep locations. Surface sampling, coring, and geochemical analysis are required to confirm the actual cause of these acoustic anomalies.
4.3. Sub-bottom acoustic data: anomalies related to shallow gas
4.3.1. Description and interpretation of seismic units
Five seismo-stratigraphic units (A1每A5) are distinguished based on the variation of acoustic signatures, bounded by coherent seismic reflections (Table 1). The units are bounded at the base and top by continuous, parallel to sub-parallel, medium-high amplitude seismic reflections (Fig. 7). However, unit geometries and bedding style varies from head to mouth of the fjord. Acoustic penetration is limited over steeply dipping bedrock ridges, resulting in reduced reflection strength and chaotic zones instead of distinct seismic reflectors (Fig. 6A). The acoustic basement is characterized by a medium to high amplitude, partly diffuse reflection, 15每20 m below the seafloor (Fig. 7). It can generally be distinguished over the entire study area and is interpreted as the top of the bedrock.
Closely spaced conformal internal reflectors have been identified in units A3, A4 and A5 (Figs. 6A and 7). It is suggested that these internal reflectors could result from the lithological variations of well stratified deposits originating from the river Gr?ndalselva. A steeply dipping (c. 70∼ dip angle), E-NE striking normal fault has been interpreted, with 4每5 m offset which displaces units A1, A2 and A3 (Fig. 7). Furthermore, three types of acoustic anomalies attributed to possible shallow gas migration/ accumulation, are discussed below.
4.3.2. Acoustic blankings 
4.3.2.1. Observations. Vertical acoustic blankings appear as patches distorting the continuity of seismic reflectors bounding the seismo-stratigraphic units. Acoustic blankings (C1 and C2) distort the continuity of a high-amplitude continuous seismic reflection in between units A4 and A5 (Figs. 6Aand8D). C1 and C2 are 5每10mwide. Several vertical acoustic blanking features (1每4 m high, 15每20 m wide) distort unit A2 in the northern part of the profile (Figs. 7 and 8B). Occasionally, they are associated with up-doming of the reflector above them. Further along the southern slope of the profile, thinner (b10 m wide) acoustic blanking features have been identified. The vertical acoustic blankings within unit A2 are widespread in the eastern part of the fjord and gradually disappear in the western part.
4.3.2.2. Interpretation. Acoustic blankings usually occur in marine sediments due to disruption of sediment layering by the migration of gas, or by the absorption of acoustic energy in overlying gas charged sediments. In the thick units of unconsolidated glacimarine sediments in Gr?nfjorden, it is suspected that these acoustic features are most likely caused by the scattering and attenuation of acoustic energy by upward migrating gas or by the presence of gas-charged sediments in units A1每A2 and A4每A5. The up-doming reflector suggests possible sediment mobilization or dewatering above some of the acoustic blanking features. The combined presence of circular patches (pockmark-like) of high-backscatter values at the seafloor and the underlying acoustic blankings supports this scenario of near-seabed fluid flow.
4.3.3. Enhanced reflections 
4.3.3.1. Observations. Coherent seismic reflections with high-amplitude and abrupt terminations have been observed at several stratigraphic levels within the marine sediments (Table 1, Figs. 6A, 7 and 8A). They occur commonly beneath the circular patches of high-backscatter (pockmark-like) and in association with acoustic blankings. A seismic reflection characterized by high-continuity and high-amplitude bounding A4 and A5 units is diffuse beneath a high-amplitude seismic reflection (marked by red line in Fig. 6A).
4.3.3.2. Interpretation. High amplitude reflections are termed as ＆enhanced reflections＊ by Judd and Hovland (1992) in the shallow marine sediments of North Sea. They usually occur due to gas saturation within porous marine sediments. The presence of free gas in the sediment pore space causes a reduction of P-wave velocity and high impedance contrast, giving rise to a reflection with anomalously high amplitude from the top of the gas (Judd and Hovland, 1992; Schroot et al., 2005). Hence, it is suspected that the high-amplitude enhanced reflections observed in Gr?nfjorden are most likely caused by the strong decrease in acoustic impedance at the top of gas-charged sediments (Figs. 6A and 7). Alternatively, the enhanced reflections within unit A5 just beneath the seafloor could also result from stratified layer of course grained sediments brought in by the river Gr?ndalselva (Fig. 7).
4.3.4. Acoustic turbid zones 
4.3.4.1. Observation. Chaotic reflections resembling dark vertical smear are observed on the acoustic data within unit A5 (Table 1). These vertical acoustic turbid zones occasionally extend 2每5 m vertically below pockmark depressions (Fig. 8C). The upper limit of these features is irregular, diffuse and without a clear boundary, but occasionally is marked by blurred high-amplitude reflections.
4.3.4.2. Interpretation. Acoustic turbidity is interpreted to result from scattering of the acoustic energy by interstitial gas bubbles trapped in the sediment pores (Schubel, 1974). It is suspected, that these zones of acoustic turbidity in Gr?nfjorden are possibly ascribed to irregularly distributed, gas-charged sediments (of low-acoustic velocity) below the pockmark depressions. The top of the turbid zone cannot be clearly resolved possibly due to minor gas seepage from the pockmarks. Alternatively, these features could be a result of ※acoustic focusing§ effect below the pockmark depressions.
4.4. 2D multichannel seismic data: fold-and-thrust belt related structures 
4.4.1. Observations 
Four seismic reflectionswithmedium-high amplitudes and low-medium continuity are identified up to a depth of 1.4 s (TWT) in the 2D seismic profiles (Table 2, Fig. 4B).Majority of these reflections are related to the impedance contrasts between shale sections and thicker sandstone layers. These reflections are tied to the geological unit boundaries in Spitsbergen, as published by Ohta et al. (1992), Braathen et al. (1995), Bergh et al. (1997) and Blinova et al. (2013). The reflectivity patterns of the seismic units and their suggested linkwith the regional stratigraphy are shown in Table 2.
4.4.2. Interpretation Shallower sections (b0.6 s) show high-amplitude continuous reflections due to sharp acoustic impedance contrast between the Janusfjellet Formation shales and the overlying Helvetiafjellet Formation sandstones. Based on observed offset between reflections, thrust faults have been interpreted in the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous successions. This has been done by identifying consistent dip-domains that point to long thrust ramps (Fig. 4B). Two d谷collement (detachment) layers have been identified as surfaces to which the thrust faults are rooted. Blinova et al. (2013) and Roy et al. (2014) have illustrated three d谷collement layers on other seismic profiles in central Isfjorden area. The d谷collement layer within the deeper Gipshuken Formation (Carboniferous) cannot be identified in this seismic profile due to the complex deformation in the western Isfjorden area (Braathen et al., 1995). The thrust faults cannot be mapped further south into Gr?nfjorden due to the lack of 2D seismic data coverage. However, sub-parallel ridges mapped on the bathymetric data aligned along the strike direction of the bedding and thrust faults mark the possible continuation of the subsurface geology within the Mesozoic rocks, sub-cropping below the seafloor of Gr?nfjorden (Figs. 2A and 3).
5. Discussion
5.1. Characterization of shallow gas in marine sediments
Three types of acoustic anomalies attributed to suspected shallow gas occurrences have been identified in the marine sediments of Gr?nfjorden: (i) enhanced reflections, (ii) acoustic turbid zones, and (iii) acoustic blankings. Quantification of shallow gas based on these acoustic anomalies is difficult. Laboratory studies on sediment acoustic properties have indicated that the presence of low concentration (0.5每 1%) of discrete gas voids within fine grained shallow marine sediments could cause zones of acoustic turbidity, whereas higher concentration interconnected gas-filled pore spaces result in enhanced reflections (Schubel, 1974; Hovland and Judd, 1988; Wilkens and Richardson, 1998). The abundance of the latter in Gr?nfjorden could possibly suggest a relatively higher concentration of gas in the topmost 10mof sediments. The physical property logs in the top 10 m of the glacimarine sediments of Isfjorden show up-core decrease in bulk density and increase in fractional porosity (42每83%) (Forwick and Vorren, 2009). Hence in this study, it is suspected that gas can preferentially accumulate within the moderate-high porous, relatively uniform, fine grained topmost 10 m of the glacimarine Holocene sediments and cause the acoustic turbid zones and enhanced reflections.
Deeper in the stratigraphy, vertical acoustic blanking zones distort continuous reflections bounding units A1, A2 and A5; suggesting possible upward gas migration or mobilized sediments (Figs. 6A, 7 and 8B). Similar suggestions have been made by Schroot et al. (2005) and L?seth et al. (2009) in an attempt to describe acoustic gas features above hydrocarbon reserves. The subglacial deposits and glacier frontal deposits of units A1 and A2 consist a mixture of silt, clay, sand, gravel and boulders (Forwick and Vorren, 2010). Different stages of loading (during glacier advance) and unloading (during glacier retreat) could have resulted in the formation of fractures (Forwick and Vorren, 2009). The effective anisotropy caused by the fracture systemcan create fluctuations in the P-wave velocity, resulting in acoustic blanking features (Arntsen et al., 2007). Hence, the presence of fractures could also lead to scattering and attenuation of the seismic waves in addition to the scattering caused by the presence of gas in the pore spaces of sediments.
5.2. Seafloor backscatter anomalies 
Major sediment input from glacially fed rivers, along its south-eastern coast, and fjord water circulation (Coriolis force driven currents), possibly contribute to the differences in bottom sediment distribution 每 resulting in variable backscatter strength between the eastern and western parts of Gr?nfjorden.
The abundant presence of fine-grained, muddy sediments and the high sedimentation rates from the rivers and glaciers could have resulted in the fast burial of the organic matter (Elverh?i et al., 1983; Forwick and Vorren, 2009). Additionally, the anoxic bottom waters in the Arctic fjords (Howe et al., 2010), provide ideal conditions for the generation of biogenic gas in the marine sediments. Under such a scenario, methane derived authigenic carbonates could form within pockmarks, by anaerobic oxidation of methane, which might result in high-backscatter anomalies.
Medium-high intensity bioturbation is found in the topmost 450 cm glacimarine sediments of Isfjorden (Forwick and Vorren, 2009). Pertaining to the high percentage of clayey silts and occurrence of bioturbation in Isfjorden (Forwick and Vorren, 2009), volume scattering caused by bioturbation might be considered an alternative probable cause for these high-backscatter anomalies. Hence, it is suggested that the circular patches of high-backscatter on the seafloor and high-backscatter from the center of pockmark depressions are most likely caused either by bioturbation, coarse lag deposits, or mineral precipitates following fluid seepage. The reason why the circular patches of high-backscatter are lacking a morphological expression is most probably, the annual supply of fluvial sediments into the central part of the fjord from the river Gr?ndalselva, located on the eastern shore of the fjord (Fig. 3). This river is active every summer and autumn, thus, most probably obliterating the depressions and smoothing the central part of the fjord seafloor with fluvial deposits.
5.3. Significance of fault conduits in fluid migration 
More than 1000 mesoscale faults were mapped in the onshore Cretaceous每 Paleocene rocks of the study area, which comprise the bedrock of Gr?nfjorden (Teyssier et al., 1995). The steeply dipping normal fault offsetting units A1, A2 and A3 has a strike direction almost orthogonal to the trend of the WSFTB (Braathen et al., 1995; Bergh et al., 1997) (Fig. 7). Similar striking faults are found in the vicinity of Gr?nfjorden, within the onshore Helvetiafjellet Formation rocks (Braathen et al., 1995; Teyssier et al., 1995). Hence, it is suggested that this relatively young normal fault was reactivated in recent times as an extensional fracture following the intercontinental compression between Svalbard and Greenland during the Late Cretaceous每Early Paleocene (Braathen and Bergh, 1995).
Ligtenberg (2005) has described the importance of sub-seismic faults associated with a major fault zone in directing vertical fluid flow from deeper source rocks, leading to the formation of pockmarks. Role of fault zones and d谷collement layers as conduits for channelled fluid flowdue to permeability anisotropy and contrasting deformation mechanisms has been documented by Tobin et al. (2001). N-E striking strikeslip faults, N-NWstriking normal and reverse faults exist in theMesozoic and Cenozoic strata of study area (Braathen and Bergh, 1995; Braathen et al., 1995; Teyssier et al., 1995). Furthermore, two d谷collement layers (D1 and D2) show splay thrusts cutting up into the overlying succession (Fig. 4B). A localized fracture frequency peak associated with low-angle thrust in the Carolinefjellet Formation has been found in drilled cores along the southwestern coast of Isfjorden (Braathen et al., 2012). Sub-seismic fractures and faults with an offset b40每50 m will not be resolved in the 2D seismic dataset used in this study. However, presence of these sub-seismic faults and fractures evidenced in drill cores and onshore bedrocks near the thrust faults may be considered as locations of concentrated fluid flow. Hence it is suspected that lateral and vertical migration of fluids along various types of faults and natural fractures could have led to the formation of pockmarks and shallow gas occurrences in Gr?nfjorden.
5.4. Suspected origins of fluids 
Sources to possible shallow gas occurrences and seafloor seepage could either be within the shallow glacigenic marine sediments (biogenic origin) or deeper organic rich rocks (thermogenic origin). Pore-water escape from the glacimarine deposits could also lead to the formation of pockmarks in Gr?nfjorden, as found in the North Sea (Harrington, 1985). However, mixture of biogenic and thermogenic signatures from near surface marine sediments have been documented in Isfjorden (Knies et al., 2004). The presence of vertical acoustic blanking zones (suggesting possible gas migration) above the fractured and faulted bedrock prompt us to investigate probable deeper thermogenic fluids originating from beneath of the glacimarine sediments. A possible source for fluids escaping through the pockmarks in northern Gr?nfjorden could be the buried coal seams of the Firkanten and Helvetiafjellet formations (Ohta et al., 1992; Dallmann, 1999). Decrease in pressure within the coal seams, following post-glacial rebound could lead to methane desorption fromthe in-situ coal deposits and release of free methane from the pore matrix of coal (Scott, 2002). However, the possibility of fluids originating from deeper strata cannot be completely ruled out due to the presence of thrust faults and organic rich Mesozoic rocks. The Middle Triassic Botneheia Formation and the Janusfjellet Subgroup in Spitsbergen consist of type II and III kerogens with high production index for hydrocarbons and high total organic contents (Bjor?y and Vigran, 1980; M?rk and Bjor?y, 1984; Bjor?y et al., 2010). Hence, these stratigraphic layers could be possible thermogenic sources to the seeping fluids in Gr?nfjorden. However, it will be necessary to obtain geochemical analysis of pore water and near surface sediments directly from seep locations to achieve a clear understanding of the composition and source of fluids.
6. Conclusions 
The evidences presented herein suggest ongoing- and/or paleo-seepage of fluids (gas and/or liquids) through the seafloor of the Gr?nfjorden, along its whole length. This conclusion is reached by the documented occurrence of pockmark depressions both in the northern and southern parts of the fjord. In the north, these pockmarks have high-backscatter values at their centers. These high-backscatter anomalies are suspected to be either caused by bioturbation, by coarse lag deposits, or by mineral precipitates following fluid seepage.
In the mid-section of the fjord there are no pockmark depressions, but only circular patches with high-backscatter. The reason why these suspected fluid flow features are lacking morphological expressions, could be the annual supply of fluvial sediments from the river which obliterates the depressions and smoothens the central part of the fjord seafloor.
Geophysical evidences of gas migration overlying the faulted and fractured bedrock along with the presence of possible hydrocarbon source rocks have allowed us to develop a conceptual model to explain the fluid flow features observed in Gr?nfjorden (Fig. 9). It can be summarized as follows:
Migrating fluids (gas and/or liquids) of unknown source and composition are suspected to be generated in the sedimentary column beneath the fjord. These fluids migrate upwards through the sedimentary strata, via faults and fractures, including thrust faults. Focused upward migration of fluids above the fjord bedrock results in acoustic blankings, which are also known as acoustic gas/seismic chimneys. Further up in the marine sediments, the fluids form either enhanced reflections, where minute gas bubbles are trapped in porous layers, or they form acoustic turbidity zones where the fluids migrate diffusively through the near-surface sediments. Finally, the fluids escape through the seafloor in a focused manner through pockmark depressions (northern and southern parts of the fjord) and pockmark-like circular patches of high backscatter (central part of the fjord).
Acknowledgement 
Norwegian Hydrographic Service is acknowledged for providing access to the high-resolution multibeam bathymetric data (permission number: 08/620). Thanks to the crew of R/V Jan Mayen (Helmer Hanssen) who supported the geophysical data collection. Statoil generously provided access to the seismic data. Schlumberger provided an academic license of Petrel. Srikumar Roy acknowledges Riko Noormets and Snorre Olaussen for providing the research facilities and guidance for this study. Constructive reviews byMarc De Batist, Adriano Mazzini and Roger Urgeles improved the manuscript to a great extent. Srikumar Roy is also thankful to the Research Council of Norway for the research grant (194868) to conduct this research project.

