Abstract
We present a linear controller and observer design
for autonomous underwater gliders based on a
model of glider dynamics that we have derived. Our
focus is on buoyancy-propelled, fixed-wing gliders
with attitude controlled by means of internal mass
distribution. In cases when some states cannot be
directly measured, such as with oceangoing gliders,
the design of an observer offers possible improvements
over current glider control methods.
1 Introduction
Initially conceived by Henry Stommel [16], autonomous
underwater gliders offer many advantages
in ocean sensing: superior spatial and temporal
measurement density, longer duration missions and
greater operational exibility. Several oceangoing
gliders are operational or under development, including
the SLOCUM glider [18], the "Spray" glider
[14] and the "Seaglider" [3]. These are all buoyancypropelled,
fixed-winged gliders which shift internal
ballast to control attitude.
On SLOCUM, the ballast tanks are configured
within the vehicle to provide the proper pitching
moment during upwards and downwards glides
[17, 18]. A sliding battery mass is used for fine adjustments
in pitch and roll. Sensors measure depth,
pitch, roll, and compass heading. Vehicle position
at the surface is determined through GPS fix. The
pitch angle, an assumed angle of attack, and a vertical
speed computed from depth measurements are
used to estimate the horizontal speed of the glider.
The glider control system periodically checks the
glider attitude and adjusts the position of the sliding
battery mass. Switching between downwards
and upwards glides is performed open loop, i.e., the
ballast is changed and the sliding mass is moved to
a new position.
Sensing and control on other gliders is similar.
For example, Spray performs active control of pitch
and roll every 40s using measured pitch and heading
errors. In the case of pitch, a low-gain proportional
control law is used, and in the case of heading, proportional
plus integral control is used [14].
The goal of our work is to improve upon currently
implemented glider control strategies. Our aim is
to develop a widely applicable approach, complementing
efforts on SLOCUM, Spray and Seaglider.
Toward that end we have developed a nonlinear
glider dynamic model and examined the use of linear
controllers and observers. A model-based approachmay
also prove useful in determining optimal
glider motions (see [2] for early work in this direction).
Our glider dynamic model is derived in [10],
where we examine steady glides, controllability and
observability in the vertical plane.
In this paper we review the derivation from [10]
and present a controller design that uses a linear
observer. Because of space and power constraints,
and because of the diffculties of underwater sensing,
many operational gliders do not carry the sensors
necessary to determine the full glider dynamic
state. In particular, glider position and velocity are
costly to measure directly. We design a dynamic
observer to estimate the glider state from a limited
set of measurements. These estimated states can be
used to determine horizontal glider motion instead
of the current methods which rely on assumptions
of constant angle of attack.
Our dynamic glider model describes a glider with
simple body and wing shape. Control is applied to
two point masses inside the vehicle: we control the
mass of a point with fixed position and the forces on
a mass with variable position. The model describes
the nonlinear coupling between the vehicle and the
shifting and changing mass. Analysis and control
law design is performed for the dynamics specialized
to the vertical plane.
In related work with colleagues, we address issues
in optimal path planning for underwater gliders
[2] and in coordinating control for a network of
autonomous underwater vehicles [1, 9, 15].
In Section 2 we describe our laboratory-scale
glider ROGUE, see Figure 1.1. ROGUE controls
buoyancy and CG position by means of a distributed
array of independently actuated ballast tanks (syringes).
In Section 3, we derive the equations of motion
for a buoyancy-driven, fixed-wing underwater
glider. Controllability and observability of steady
glide paths in the vertical plane are studied in Section
4. Linear observers and linear control laws are
developed in Section 5 for stabilizing these glide
paths in the presence of disturbances. A simulation
of the controlled glider modelled to resemble
ROGUE is also presented. We give final remarks in
Section 6.
2 The ROGUE gliding vehicle
ROGUE is a laboratory-scale gliding vehicle designed
for experiments in glider dynamics and control.
The vehicle consists of a water-tight body,
modular wings and tail, internal ballast actuators,
and on-board electronics and batteries. Using its
on-board computer and sensors the vehicle is capable
of autonomous or remote operation. ROGUE's
ellipsoidal body has axes of length 18, 12 and 6
inches. The vehicle body contains the vehicle actuators,
power, computer and sensors, and has mounts
for the modular vehicle wings and tail. Different sets
of wings and tail can be attached to perform experiments
with different vehicle hydrodynamic profiles.
We note that the body and wings have not been designed
for optimal gliding performance but rather in
consideration of available facilities and other manufacturing
constraints. Experiments are currently
planned using the ROGUE vehicle in our twentyone-
foot diameter laboratory tank and in an olympic
sized pool at Princeton University.
In the configuration shown in Figure 2.1, each
wing has span of 28 inches with aspect ratio 9.3.
The wings are symmetric airfoils from [13] for low
Reynolds number. The tail was sized using standard
aircraft rules as in [4] and [11] . The vertical
tail is designed to give yaw stability in forward glides
and is modular, allowing tail volume to be changed.
The glider body, wings and tail are all machined
from UHMW (ultra-high molecular weight) plastic.
In Figure 2.1 the top half of the vehicle is separated
from the bottom so the internal components
are visible. The metal box at the center of the vehicle
contains the vehicle on-board computer. Two
syringe-type ballast tanks are visible, one on each
side of the computer housing. Visible to the left of
each ballast tank is its driving servo (they appear as
black squares). To the right of the computer housing
are two white battery packs.
ROGUE contains three Nickel-Cadmium battery
packs to provide power to the vehicle actuators,
computer and sensors. Two "8-packs" of AA batteries
power the computer, sensors and signal conditioning
electronics. A "4-pack" of AA batteries
powers the servos and vehicle optional R/C receiver.
ROGUE contains four independently actuated
syringe-style ballast tanks aligned along the vehicle
long axis, two mounted on each side of the vehicle
centerline. The two ballast tanks in the upper half
of the vehicle point forwards, while the two in the
lower half point to the aft of the vehicle. Each tank
is made of a clear plastic cylinder with an internal
plunger. Ball screw mechanisms with a high torque
modified RC servo drive each ballast tank. The tank
connects to the vehicle exterior via tubing. Moving
the plunger inside each ballast tank transfers water
from the tank to outside the vehicle or the reverse.
Filling the tanks with different amounts of water
causes ROGUE to become positively or negatively
buoyant and moves the CG relative to the vehicle
centroid. Each tank has a 100 mL capacity for .4"
of plunger travel. Together the four tanks have a
400 g capacity. The relative positions of the four
tanks allows for moderate adjustments in the vehicle
CG position. The high torque servos driving
the plungers connect to linear potentiometers and
use feedback control to regulate the tank's plunger
position. The tanks are filled completely with water
before ROGUE is deployed to eliminate any air
bubbles in the tanks.
ROGUE's on-board computer is a TattleTale
Model 8. The TattleTale Model 8 is based on the
Motorola 68332 chip and also includes a PIC 16C64
chip for low-power operation. The TattleTale allows
up to 8 analog inputs and up to 25 digital input/
output signals. The Motorola 68332 chip contains
a central processor as well as a "time processing
unit (TPU)" capable of performing simple
clock functions independently of the main processor.
There are 12 TPU channels available to the Tattle-
Tale user, each of which can generate a clock signal,
measure the duty cycle of a square wave signal,
etc. Electronics have been added to multiplex the
analog input signals doubling the computer's analog
input capacity to 16 channels. The TattleTale
Model 8 includes 256 kilobytes of RAM (temporary
memory) and 256 kilobytes of ash EEPROM (permanent
memory). The memory can be expanded to
any size available on a PCMCIA memory expansion
card.
ROGUE's computer serves three major purposes:
to store sensor data, process sensor data according
to a pre-defined feedback control law, and apply
command signals to ROGUE's actuators according
to a feedback control law or to a remote command
from a modified R/C transmitter.
TattleTale programs are written in C and compiled
on a host computer. Programs may be downloaded
from PC to TattleTale via serial link to the
RAM or to EEPROM. The TattleTale is housed
within a metal box to shield it from interference.
Also mounted within the metal box is an optional
R/C receiver for remote operation of the vehicle.
ROGUE's sensor suite includes the following elements:
two depth sensors, two single-axis inclinometers
mounted to measure pitch and roll angles,
and three angular rate sensors mounted to measure
pitch, roll and yaw rates. The vehicle also contains
analog preamplifiers for each of the sensors.
The amplifiers and angular sensors are mounted in
a metal box in the lower half of the vehicle. The
two pressure sensors are differential wet/wet sensors
located at the fore and aft of the vehicle hull and
are connected to the vehicle exterior and interior by
tubing. The pressure sensors are used to measure
depth. All sensors are connected to the on-board
computer for logging data and performing feedback
control using sensor data.
3 Glider Dynamics
The variables used in this paper are defined in Table
3.1.
3.1 Equations of Motion in 3D
We first review the derivation of the equations of
motion for our underwater glider. For a more detailed
derivation see [10]. Our choice of glider body
and wing configuration is motivated by the designs
of ROGUE, SLOCUM, Spray and Seaglider. We
model the underwater glider as a rigid body with
fixed wings (and tail) immersed in a uid with buoyancy
control and controlled internal moving mass.
We take the hull to be ellipsoidal with wings and tail
attached so that the center of buoyancy (CB) is at
the center of the ellipsoid. We assign a coordinate
frame fixed on the vehicle body to have its origin at
the CB and its axes aligned with the principle axes
of the ellipsoid. Let body axis 1 lie along the long
axis of the vehicle (positive in the direction of the
nose of the glider), let body axis 2 lie in the plane
of the wings and body axis 3 point in the direction
orthogonal to the wings as shown in Figure 3.1.
The total stationary mass, ms, (also referred to
as body mass) is the sum of three terms: mh is a
fixed mass that is uniformly distributed throughout
the ellipsoid, mw is a fixed point mass that may be
offset from the CB, and mb is the variable ballast
point mass which is fixed in location at the CB.
The vector from the CB to the point mass mw is
rw. The vector from the CB to the center of mass
of the stationary mass ms = mh +mw +mb is rs.
The moving internal point mass is m. The vector
rp(t) describes the position of this mass with respect
to the CB at time t. The total mass of the vehicle
is then
The mass of the displaced uid is denoted m and
we define m0 = mv-m so that the vehicle is negatively
(positively) buoyant if is negative (positive).
The different masses and position vectors are
illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Let Jh denote the inertia matrix, with respect to
the body frame, for the uniformly distributed mass
mh. Define the operator ^ so that for a vector x =
(x1; x2; x3)T ,
Equivalently, for vector y = (y1; y2; y3)T , ^xy =
xy. The inertia matrix for the stationary (body)
mass expressed with respect to body frame coordinates
is
Since the variable ballast mass mb is a point mass
located at the CB, it does not contribute to Js, and
in particular Js is a constant.
The orientation of the glider is given by the rotation
matrix R. R maps vectors expressed with
respect to the body frame into inertial frame coordinates.
The position of the glider b = (x; y; z)T is
the vector from the origin of the inertial frame to the
origin of the body frame (vehicle CB) as shown in
Figure 3.3. The vehicle moves through the uid with
translational velocity v = (v1; v2; v3)T and angular
velocity 
 = (
1;
2;
3)T , expressed with respect
to the body frame. (Note that we have diverged
from the notation typical of the submarine literature
where v = (u; v;w)T and 
 = (p; q; r)T . The
notation that we use here is taken from texts in classical
mechanics such as [5] and is more convenient
for the derivation and analysis.) In this notation,
the kinematics of the glider are given by
Let P be the momentum of the vehicle-fluid system
expressed with respect to the body frame. Let
 be the total angular momentum about the origin
of the body frame. Let Pp represent the point mass
momentum with respect to the body frame. We differentiate
the expressions relating the momenta P,
, and Pp to the momenta in the inertial frame.
Applying the kinematic expressions (3.2) and (3.1),
then applying Newton's laws, gives the following dynamic
equations in body coordinates:
where all vectors are expressed with respect to the
inertial frame. The vector xi locates the point of
application of the force fexti with respect to the inertial
coordinate frame. fexti is an external force
applied to the system and extj is a pure external
torque. k is a unit vector pointing in the direction of
gravity. These external forces and torques include
those due to gravity and buoyancy; however, gravity
is included explicitly in the third set of equations
as it is the only external force acting on the movable
point mass. is the internal force applied from the vehicle
body onto the point mass (a control force) in body coordinates.
Define the control vector
To derive expressions for P, , and Pp, we determine
the total kinetic energy of the glider-uid
system. Let Ts be the kinetic energy of the rigid
body with mass ms and inertia matrix Js. Let vp
be the absolute velocity of the movable point mass
m expressed in body coordinates. Given that the
velocity of m relative to the body frame is r_p, we
compute
The kinetic energy Tp of the movable point mass is
then computed to be
Kirchhogff [8] showed that the kinetic energy of an
unbounded volume of ideal uid due to the motion
of an immersed rigid body takes the form
whereMf is the added mass matrix, Jf is the added
inertia matrix and Df is the added cross term.
These matrices depend upon the external shape of
the body and the density of the uid. We assume
that at low angle of attack, the contribution of the
wings is dominated by lift and drag forces. Thus,
we make the simplifying assumption that the added
mass and inertia terms can be computed solely from
the vehicle hull.
The total vehicle uid kinetic energy T = Ts +
Tp + Tf is computed to be
Since the vehicle hull is ellipsoidal (we neglect the
wings in this instance), Mf and Jf are diagonal
and Df = 0. Let Mf = diag(mf1;mf2;mf3) and
Jf = diag(Jf1; Jf2; Jf3). Define
where I is the 3 * 3 identity matrix. Let M =
diag(m1;m2;m3) and J = diag(J1; J2; J3). Furthermore,
assume that mw = 0 so that rs = 0.
We can then compute the momenta as
Inverting these relationships then gives the body
velocities in terms of the body momenta. To get
the equations of motion in terms of body velocities,
we differentiate the equation for the body velocities
with respect to time. We assume that buoyancy
is changed in a symmetric way (e.g., ballast
is pumped on and off board in streams with the
appropriate symmetry) so that there is negligible
associated thrust or moment on the glider. Let the
ballast control input u4 be defined as
Dififerentiating the body velocities
then substituting for the derivatives and substituting (3.9)
for the relationship between momenta and velocity, the
complete equations of motion for the underwater glider moving 
in threedimensional space are refer to external forces and moments, in this case
lift and drag, with respect to the body frame.
3.2 Equations of Motion in the Vertical Plane
We now specialize the model to the vertical plane,
the i-k plane in inertial coordinates and the e1-e3
plane in body coordinates. The elements of R, b, v,

, rp, Pp, and u corresponding to the e2 direction
are set to zero. The equations of motion (3.11) for
space are the gliding vehicle restricted to the vertical plane
are then
Here, is pitch angle,  is the angle of attack, D
is drag, L is lift and MDL is the viscous moment as
shown in Figure 3.4. These forces and moment are
modelled as
where the K's are constant coeffcients. This model
is a standard one, derived using airfoil theory and
potential ow calculations and then verified using
experimental observations, see for example [4, 11].
The method for determination of the coeffcients is
described in Section 4.3.
As shown in Figure 3.4, we denote the glide path
angle by  where
We also denote the glider speed by V where
We will typically specify a glide path by desired glide
path angle  and desired speed . We define inertial
coordinates such that  coincides with
the desired path:
Then, measures the vehicle's perpendicular distance
to the desired path. We define two gliding objectives:
GO1 The objective is to control only the direction
and speed of the vehicle's glide path. In this
case we need not consider x and z at all.
GO2 The objective is to control gliding along a prescribed
line (see Figure 3.5). In this case we will
include (but exclude) in our analysis and
we aim to make
In several glider designs the moving mass is restricted
to one degree of freedom in the planar case.
This case is addressed in [10].
4 Controllability of Steady
Glide Paths
In this section we compute steady glide paths. We
then study controllability and observability of these
glide paths.
4.1 Gliding Equilibria
We prescribe a desired glide path by specifying the
desired glide path angle and the desired speed
Vd. We denote with subscript "d" the value of all
dynamic variables at the glide equilibria. To get
the conditions for such planar gliding equilibria, we
set the left hand side of equations (3.24) and (3.14)
through (3.22) to zero.
With their left hand sides set to zero and given
, equations (3.16) and (3.17) may be solved for
. We can then compute
mbd can then be solved again using (3.16) and
(3.17). Finally, equation (3.15) with left hand side
set to zero gives a one-parameter family of solutions
for (rP1d; rP3d )T .
First, we compute from equations (3.16) and
(3.17) with left hand sides zero. This yields a
quadratic equation for. 
2, we have
Equation (4.1) may be solved for a realizable fid
provided the discriminant of the quadratic equation
is greater than or equal to zero. Evaluating the
condition on the discriminant in the range (will 
give a range of possible glide path angles d
depending on the glider hydrodynamic parameters.
See [10]. Since the drag model is valid only at small
angles of attack, we take  as the solution of (4.1)
with smaller magnitude.
The special case of is covered in [10].
We may determine mbd from (3.16) and (3.17),
Finally, we may solve for a one-parameter family
of sliding mass locations (rP1d; rP3d )T which satisfy
equation (3.15). The family of solutions is
and where  is a real number. The vector 
is a particular solution of equation (3.15). Since
is the direction of gravity
in body coordinates, is orthogonal to the
direction of gravity and  measures the vehicle's
"bottom-heaviness" as shown in Figure 4.1.
For an experimental vehicle, rP3 may be a more
physically relevant choice of parameter than .
Equilibrium mass locations in this case are addressed
in [10].
4.2 Linearization
We determine the linearization for the planar
glider about a steady glide path. Let 
Then the linearized system is
where we have abbreviated and
The notation  indicates that the quantity is to
be evaluated at the desired equilibrium.
4.3 Controllability
In this section we describe controllability and observabililty
of steady glide paths for a model of
our experimental vehicle ROGUE, described in Section
2. Mass and inertia properties were measured
directly. Added mass and inertia properties can be
found, for example, in [7]. Lift and drag for the
body were found experimentally as described in [6].
Lift and drag for the wings were taken from the data
in [13]. Lift for the body plus wings was then computed
using Schrenk's method [12], and drag was
computed as the sum of the drag on the wing and
the body. The lift moment was approximated by 
taking into account the tail. The vehicle mode
l parameters are given as follows
The first three masses, m, mh and m were measured
with a high degree of accuracy. The other terms
have less precision because they are based on lookup
tables and approximation methods.
Four steady glide paths are calculated using the
method of Section 4.1. The glide paths are at glide
angles 30, 45, 30 and 45. We compute the
glib de path at 30 by choosing a desired glide speed
Vd = 0:30 m/s and a desired vertical location of the
movable mass given by rP3d = 4 cm. This results in
an equilibrium variable mass given by mbd = 1:36
kg. The glide path at 45 is computed for these
same values of rP3d and mbd . The corresponding
equilibrium speed for this glide is computed as Vd =
:37 m/s.Similarly, we computed the two steady
upward glide paths, for the same value of rP3d and
the same buoyant force magnitude, i.e., the value of
jm0d j is held constant. Recall that m0 is the mass of
the vehicle mv less the mass of the displaced uid
m. The full description of each of the four glide
paths is given in Table 4.1.
Local properties of these steady glide paths can
be studied using the linearization of Section 4.2. By
plugging in the equilibrium values, we can examine
the linearization for stability, controllability and observability.
The four glide paths listed in Table 4.1
all have a relatively slow unstable mode. They are
all, however, locally controllable. That is, A and B
as given by (4.6) and (4.7), when evaluated at any
of the four equilibria, satisfy the controllability rank
condition. Note that the linearization includes the
state z meaning that controllability extends to the
variable z. Accordingly, we can successfully design
a linear controller that will locally accomplish not
only glide objective GO1 but also GO2.
It is of interest to check the controllability rank
condition in the case that the movable mass m can
only move in one direction (i.e., rP3 is fixed). To do
this we have linearized the equations of motion for
the single degree-of-freedom moving mass derived in
[10]. Again the new A and B matrices for this case,
when evaluated at any of the above four glide paths,
satisfy the controllability rank condition. Thus, it
seems that at least for linear type control action, not
much is lost in restricting the degrees of freedom of
the movable mass from two to one. Several operational
gliders have moving masses that translate in
the vehicle long axis and rotate in the roll direction,
corresponding to a design with one degree of
freedom when considering only the vertical plane.
The movable mass m for ROGUE is approximately
1/6 of the vehicle displacement m. This is of
the same relative order as the movable mass in the
gliders SLOCUM, Spray and Seaglider. Variations
in this mass or its location will not in principle affect
local controllability of a feasible glide path, but
may affect the range of feasible glide paths and the
switching between them.
4.4 Observability and State Estimation
Observability of the linearized model about the four
glide paths listed in Table 4.1 was also investigated.
If GO1 is our objective, i.e., if we are interested in
controlling only the direction and speed of the vehicle's
glide path, then we need not measure z
0. The nine-dimensional dynamic model (which excludes
z) is completely observable with measurements limited
to movable mass position rp1, rp3 and variable
mass mb. In this case, pitch angle , pitch rate 
2,
linear velocity components v1 and v3 and the momentum
of the movable mass Pp1, Pp3 need not be
sensed. Observability means that with the measurements
of rp1, rp3 and mb, a dynamic observer could
be designed to give an estimate of the unmeasured
states , 
2, v1, v3, Pp1 and Pp3. Of course,  is
typically already measured and 
2 is not so hard to
measure, so the real advantage is in the estimation
of v1, v3, Pp1 and Pp3 which are more difficult to
measure. The nine-dimensional dynamic model is
also completely observable with measurements limited
to , rp1 (or rp3) and mb. Again this means
that using these three measurement signals, an observer
could be designed to estimate the rest of the
states.
We note that the use of a dynamic observer to
estimate the glider states has the potential to improve
the accuracy of horizontal motion determination
over current methods which are based on assumptions
of constant angle of attack, etc. For example,
on SLOCUM, the horizontal motion of the
glider during the glide is estimated from GPS fixes
taken at the surface, measured pitch angle, an assumed
angle of attack and vertical speed computed
from depth measurements [17]. Similarly, on Spray,
horizontal ight distance is calculated based on a
constant pitch, heading and angle of attack to which
the vehicle is being controlled [14].
If GO2 is our objective, i.e., if we want to control
the glider to a prescribed line in the plane, then
we need a measurement of z. Recall from (3.23)
that z depends on both depth z, which is easily
measured, and horizontal position x, which is not
so easily measured. The measurements rp1, rp3 and
mb, together with a measurement of z (or alternatively
, rp1, mb and z), do not render x observable.
This means that without an initial condition measurement
x(0), the trajectory x(t) cannot be computed,
and so z is not observable. That is, using
any combination of the other nine states, it is not
possible to design a dynamic observer to estimate
the z state. However, with an initial measurement
of x given say from a GPS fix taken when the glider
is at the surface, the horizontal motion of the glider
can be dead reckoned using velocity estimates from
the observer. This introduces some error z ded
into the estimate of the z state. Using the deduced
ded in the feedback control, the glider can perform
GO2, gliding along or parallel to the desired glide
path with some offset in the z direction due to dead
reckoning error.
The dead reckoning approach involves calculating
horizontal velocity, then integrating to obtain
a deduced.
This can then be used to calculate 
ded. The pitch angle and depth z can be measured directly.
Estimates of the velocities, v1est and v3est, are provided
by the observer, while is determined by the desired glide.
The equation for the dead reckoned is then
The nine observable states include v1 and v3 so our
observer estimates v1est and v3est will converge to
the actual states when we are close enough to the
equilibrium glide path for the linearization to be
valid. When there is some error in the observer
estimate of the velocities, integrating (4.8) to find
xded and using (4.9) will result in some error. 
This error depends on the observer state
estimate error, which will vary with different state
trajectories and disturbances.
5 Controlled Planar Gliding With Observer
In this section we demonstrate, in simulation, controlled
gliding in the vertical plane by designing
and testing a linear controller and observer for the
glide path moving 30 downward as described in Table
4.1. Since the controller is linear, we expect that
it should take initial conditions nearby to the 30
downward glide path. We demonstrate this result
by starting the glider at the  45 downward steady
glide and using the linear controller to move it to
the 30 downward glide solely by feedback.
5.1 Controller Design
We address the case where only a limited set of the
states are measured, depending on the sensors on
the glider. We design the controller and then, given
the limited set of state measurements, design a dynamic
observer to determine the full state of the
glider. The controller is designed for the linearization
about the 30 downward glide using the LQR
(linear quadratic regulator) method. This is a standard
linear optimal control design method which
produces a stabilizing control law that minimizes a
cost function that is a weighted sum of the squares
of the states and input variables.
The cost function to be minimized is defined as
where Q and R are state and control penalty matrices.
Q and R were chosen to ensure well-behaved
dynamics and to prevent large motions in the movable
mass position and variable mass that would exceed
physical limitations. Taking into account real or 
desirable maximum state values, the states associated
with vehicle and movable mass velocity and
variable mass and pitch angle were weighted most
heavily. No significant tuning was performed. The
weight selections are given by
Q = diag(:05; :5; 1; 2; 2; :1; :1; 1; 1; :5);
R = diag(1; 1; 1):
The corresponding control law is  where
K is computed using MATLAB as the solution to
the Riccati equation given A;B; Q;R.
5.2 Observer Design
In the case that some states are not provided by
sensor data, as is likely to be the case with velocities
v1 and v3 in an autonomous glider, it is possible
to construct a linear optimal observer to estimate
the unavailable states. As described in Section 4.3
the nine dimensional dynamic model excluding is
completely observable. If is not directly sensed, it
is an unobservable state but can be dead reckoned.
The construction of an optimal linear observer for
the nine dimensional system proceeds in a similar
manner to the construction of the LQR controller.
Our linear system is described by A and B, de-
fined above. The system output is y = Cx + v,
where C is the system output matrix determined
by the available sensors and v is noise. Given a linear
time invariant system subject to additive process
disturbance w(t) and measurement noise v(t)
which are zero mean, gaussian, white noise processes,
an observer which minimizes variance in the
estimate error is derived in a manner similar to the
LQR. The cost function to be minimized is
where is the system zerostate
response to plant disturbance 
and is the zero-state response
to measurement noise. Let and  represent the
white-noise processes w(t) and v(t) , where the
Dirac Delta Function represents the fact that
white noise is uncorrelated in time. Let W =
and  be the disturbance and
noise covariance matrices. Then choosing observer
feedback  minimizes the cost function
J0, where P is the solution to the observer matrix
Riccati equation given A; C;W; V .
In this observer design the W and V matrices
are chosen according to reasonable estimates of the
disturbances and noise. The covariance matrix W
is a diagonal matrix whose elements are the square
of the standard deviation of the state disturbances.
The standard deviation is taken to be ten percent of
the desired value at the equilibrium glide for each
state. In the cases where a state xi has desired
value zero, we determined a maximum deviation
4xi from equilibrium by simulating several switches
between equilibrium glides under full state feedback
control. Ten percent of 4xi is then used as the
standard deviation for the i
th state. The noise covariance
matrix V depends on the noise properties
of the sensors used in the vehicle. In this design
they are taken to be of the same or smaller order of
magnitude as W:
When determining the cost function to be minimized,
if V is large then computed gain L will be
small, so direct measurements have smaller impact
on the state estimate. A large W implies disturbances
dominate the plant dynamics. In that case
computed gain L is large, resulting in an observer
state estimate which depends more heavily on sensor
measurements than the plant model.
5.3 Glider Simulation
In Figures 5.1-5.3 we show a MATLAB simulation
of the glider switching from a 45 downward glide
to a 30 downward glide path. This is accomplished
by turning off the controller for the first glide at
t = 5 seconds and turning on the linear controller
for the second glide. In each figure we show results
using full state feedback and using an observer to
estimate the state used in the control law.
When calculating the controller gain matrix K
and the observer gain matrix L, some plant parameter
error is incorporated into the design. When calculating
the gain matrices using the respective Riccati
equations, the parameters which determine the
A and B matrices are varied by up to ten percent.
Changing the A and B matrices used as the system
model in the controller and observer design represents
imperfect knowledge of the glider dynamic coeffcients.
In Figure 5.1 we show the glide path before and
after the switch. In Figure 5.2 we show plots of position,
pitch, linear and angular velocity as a function
of time and in Figure 5.3 we show the position of
the movable mass, the net buoyant force as well as
the control inputs as a function of time. The figures
show that the 45 downward glide path is in the region
of attraction of the linear controller designed
for the 30 downward glide path. Furthermore, the
transient is well behaved.
6 Final Remarks
Laboratory experiments of controlled gliding with
ROGUE will be described in a future publication.
Experiments with ROGUE are planned to provide
verification of our dynamic model and to test the
controller and observer designs. We also plan to
realize these and future results on sea-worthy gliders
such SLOCUM in collaboration with our colleagues
who build and operate these vehicles.
Other future work includes extending the glider
control design to motions in the horizontal plane
such as waypoint following, control of unsteady motions,
and three dimensional motions such as gliding
in a spiral. We intend to develop the glider control
methodology further by investigating nonlinear
feedback control laws, feedforward control and path
planning. Work with colleagues on optimal control
theory which is applicable to glider path planning
appears in [2].
Work is underway to develop decentralized control
laws to produce underwater vehicles that school
like fish [9, 15]. By developing control schemes for
coordinated group motion of underwater vehicles,
we hope to produce a network of gliders that can
serve as a fast and effective ocean sensing platform.
For example, in [1], decentralized control algorithms
are described that allow a pair of vehicles to climb
a spatially distributed gradient. In support of this
effort we are building an experimental, underwater
test-bed for multiple-vehicle control [1]. Vehicle systems,
including control systems, hardware and software,
and new sensors developed for the experimental
grouping vehicle in [1] may also be incorporated
into the design of future laboratory gliders.
7 Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Monique Chyba, Kristin
Pettersen, Ralf Bachmayer and Craig Woolsey for
helpful discussions on this work.