Abstract¡ª Underwater Gliders (UGs) are a type of 
Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV) that uses buoyancy 
engines, an energy efficient locomotion, primarily for 
oceanography. In this paper, control strategies for existing 
underwater gliders are reviewed. A total of 50 papers indexed by 
Scopus with keywords control and underwater gliders were 
reviewed from 1989 to 2014. The majority of gliders use classical 
controllers, which cannot dynamically compensate for unmodeled 
hydrodynamic forces and unknown variations in water 
current and wind. With increasing operational depths and larger 
payloads, control strategies will become an increasingly 
important aspect for these gliders. Control strategies 
implemented in underwater gliders were reviewed and 
alternative control strategies are proposed. 
Keywords¡ª Control strategy, underwater gliders, review; 
I. INTRODUCTION 
An underwater glider is a type of autonomous underwater 
vehicle (AUV) that uses buoyancy control in conjunction with 
wings to convert vertical motion to horizontal motion in a sawtooth 
pattern and thereby propelling itself in forward direction 
with very low power consumption [1]. They use buoyancy and 
wings to produce forward motion for long duration ranging 
from weeks to months and cover distances over 3000 km 
[2].There are more than 50 different AUGs developed for 
research and commercial purposes. Much theoretical and 
experimental analysis has been carried out on glider dynamics 
[3, 4], glider design and development for payload and 
maneuverability [5, 6], performance and stability analysis [7, 
8], trajectory control analysis [9, 10] and path planning [9, 11] 
based on different controller techniques[12].The majority of 
these gliders use classical controllers such as ProportionalIntegral-
Derivative (PID) and Linear Quadratic Regulator 
(LQR). However, These control methods cannot provide 
simultaneously easy control implementation and fast 
convergence speed for stabilization in the presence of 
continuously varying water current [13]. 
In this paper, existing underwater glider control strategies 
are reviewed with emphasis on their actuation system that 
includes wings and rudder control, followed by external effects 
of water current and variable loads which influence their 
motion. 
No work to date achieved the control of fully under actuated 
vehicles via dynamic modelling with the presence of external 
varying forces such as water current and advanced controller 
design to compensate these problems and then implement them 
to underwater gliders. In order to overcome these issues, 
serious design and implementation considerations are required 
for robust control approach. 
II. UNDERWATER GLIDER MOTION CONTROL 
The motion of an underwater gliders depends upon a 
buoyancy control system combined with a set of wings and 
rudder to move in vertical and horizontal direction through a 
water column [14]. The glider descends and ascends in water 
column due to control of buoyancy engine, which consists of 
oil filled bladder or piston evacuated cylinder. Buoyancy is 
controlled to be slightly positive or negative due to which a 
glider can move with almost zero power consumption with 
limited speed [15]. For example, the Spray glider as shown in 
Figure 1, has a maximum speed of 0.35 m/sec but can operate 
for up to six months. 
Regardless of the design, gliders depend on vertical space to 
operate efficiently but cannot resist with strong currents, which 
ultimately creates a problem to control motion and trajectory. 
On the other hand, the average horizontal speed of underwater 
gliders is about 0.3 m/s. The low speed limitation has created 
challenges in controller performance such as control of vehicle 
orientation, position and velocity [14]. There is a direct effect 
of environmental forces including winds, wave and surface 
currents upon the motion of underwater gliders and AUVs [21]. 
These effects may be compensated through an effective control 
strategy. Therefore the control strategy should be chosen to 
reduce the effect of these disturbances. However, the 
challenges associated with control of underwater gliders 
include a highly nonlinear dynamic system and complex 
hydrodynamic effects. Different control strategies for 
laboratory scale and commercial scale have been implemented 
to underwater vehicles which are discussed in table 1. 
The ALBAC glider used its payload to glide downward and 
upon releasing its payload, glided upward [2]. However most 
gliders such as SLOCUM [22], Spray [23] and Seaglider [18] 
use a buoyancy engine instead. These three gliders are fixed 
winged buoyancy propelled gliders which shift their internal 
ballast mass to control their attitude [1]. 
Leonard and Graver [1] developed a laboratory scale 
ROGUE glider to implement a model based feedback open 
loop approach. Another laboratory scale glider , the ALEX 
glider, developed by Arima et al [7] designed an independently 
controllable wings and rudder. 
III. CONTROL STRATEGIES 
Several control strategies have been proposed to control the 
position, velocity and trajectory of UGs such as PID controllers 
by Bhatta and Noh [24, 25], Linear Quadratic Regulator 
(LQR)by Nina and Graver [9, 26], Sliding Mode Controllers 
(SMC) by Yang and Song [27, 28], Neural Network (NN) by 
Isa[19] and Dong[29], Fuzzy logic for self-tuning by Loc [30] 
and Model Predictive Controllers by Cooney [31] and Steenson 
[32].PID control loops used for pitch and roll control by Panish 
[16] allows their UG to be guided in a variety of ways. In such 
control strategies, vertical and horizontal modes are decoupled 
to control the pitch, angle of attack and depth of the glider. The 
robustness of PID controller using nonlinear time invariant 
aspects of glider designs is investigated by Bender [33]. AUG 
dynamics are nonlinear but PID controllers are based-on linear 
control law. Therefore, PID controller cannot dynamically 
compensate for un-modeled vehicle hydrodynamic forces and 
unknown disturbances. As such, combinations of control 
strategies to form hybrid controllers are used to handle the 
complexity that is produced due to nonlinearity and 
hydrodynamics effect. 
Sliding mode control(SMC) for underwater trajectory 
tracking control has been used by Yang and Bessa [27, 34] ; 
and Liu [21]. SMC is a robust system with low sensitivity to 
environmental disturbances. However, chattering is a well-
known downside of this control strategy, which can degrade 
the performance of gliders and may lead to instability. 
A multivariable Multiple input Multiple Output (MIMO) 
control system have been proposed for AUVs and ROVs 
including self-tuning and position control by Goheen [35]. The 
dynamic model using LQR technique was implemented in a 
laboratory scale ROGUE glider in order to examine its motion. 
However, LQR has poor switching performance between 
upward and downward glide paths [26]. 
In a comparative study, Nag [36] discussed the use of an 
adaptive fuzzy control strategy for tracking trajectory system 
combined with PID controller. However, they considered the 
glider as a SISO system only and neglected nonlinearities. A 
recurrent NN based on MPC control strategy for motion 
control problem in longitudinal plane is proposed by Shan [37] 
for convergence to optimal solution. However, in this approach 
the effect of water current has not been considered. 
Due to the inherent non-linearity in the dynamics, and hence 
difficulties in determining an accurate mathematical model of 
the vehicle, an adaptive fuzzy logic based control strategy 
coupled with dynamic compensators have been designed. The 
effect of fuzzy logic for depth controller has been implemented 
on KAUV-1 which has the advantage of fast self-tuning [30]. 
The simulation results showed satisfactory performance but 
again, the effect of external disturbance and nonlinearity were 
not investigated. The nonlinearity of the Odyssey IV for the 
purpose of disturbance rejection using Model predictive 
controller was discussed by Cooney [31] and a hybrid PIDMPC 
controller is suggested for improving and predicting 
future values. However, a communication problem between 
commanded input and actual input was observed during 
implementation of this strategy in Odyssey IV. In [27], Yang 
addressed the robustness issue produced due to nonlinearities 
and proposed the adaptive sliding mode controller. However, 
the resulting chattering effect lead to instability. 
Neural network (NN) control strategy [19] have been 
proposed as a solution to the lack of robustness due to 
nonlinear effect in dynamic models. Due to the ability to 
handle nonlinearity and adapt to changing conditions as is the 
case of varying currents in glider dynamics, NN has been 
implemented in USM hybrid underwater glider [19]. In 
proposed model, all glider parameters e.g. pitch, speed, 
maneuverability, sliding mass, wing, rudder and propeller were 
controlled. A neural network self-tuning PID controller [29] for 
a spherical AUV was proposed for the purpose of controlling 
the vehicle velocity and tracking the desired target in the 
vehicle fixed coordinate system. 
IV. HYBRID CONTROL STRATEGY 
The performance of individual control strategies can be 
improved by combining it with another control strategy to form 
a hybrid control strategy. Different implementations of this 
concept have been applied successfully in AUVs such as 
Adaptive fuzzy sliding mode control strategy. 
A. Combining fuzzy logic and sliding mode 
Fuzzy logic has been used to design a sliding mode 
controller[28, 38]. However, the FLC was implemented in a 
SISO system only. Alternatively, PID and FLC have been 
combined to design a new controller. To eliminate the 
chartering effect of sliding mode, a boundary layer is 
introduced around the sliding surface by Song [28]. A general 
block diagram of adaptive fuzzy sliding mode controller is 
shown in Figure 3. 
B. Sliding mode fuzzy controller 
In this approach, sliding mode is used to design functions of 
the fuzzy logic controller and a switching function is formed 
which can eliminate the chattering effect. This type of 
approach was experimentally applied to OEX series AUVs for 
pitching and heading control. The inputs to SMFC heading 
controller were defined as heading error while the output for 
heading controller was to control the rudder.[39]. 
The control strategy can be further improved using a
combination of nonlinear controllers for the motion of
autonomous underwater gliders based on added mass and
inertia, effect of external varying disturbances and rudder
control inputs[40] . However the effectiveness of an adaptive
fuzzy sliding mode controller has only been investigated for
the Snorkel AUV [38]. Recent work concerning different
control techniques for AUVs and AUGs is summarized in
Table 2.
V. MAJOR LIMITATION AND CHALLENGES 
Very few control schemes are proposed to measure the 
sensitivity analysis of environmental disturbances such as 
Isa[12] and Fan [50], but this is a new idea in undersea 
vehicles to consider both water current estimation and 
payload factor in dynamic modelling and control for UGs. 
The main attempt is to choose a controller that can guarantee 
the suppression or at least the limitation of the overshoot in 
the system response. An appropriate control strategy is 
required that will damp out the external disturbances and will 
follow trajectory with minimum error for varying payloads. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Different control strategies have been demonstrated for 
acceptable control performance in different AUVs and 
AUGs, but they still have limitations in compensating for the 
high nonlinearity of underwater gliders including external 
disturbances and carrying large payloads which are the main 
reasons that make it a challenging problem to control the 
underwater glider. Due to this it is highly desirable to design 
a controller that is robust and will give real time response. 
For this, combinations of two or more controllers have been 
developed by some researchers for AUVs to form a hybrid 
controller which can minimize the negative effect and will 
improve the performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Authors are thankful to Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS 
for providing the resources required for this work. 

