A new approach to estimate the aerosol scattering ratios for the atmospheric
correction of satellite remote sensing data in coastal regions
Aerosol scattering reflectance is the most uncertain term to be determined in the atmospheric correction of
satellite remote sensing data. The values in the visible bands depend on the aerosol scattering ratios (the epsilon
spectrum). The epsilon value in the Near-infrared (NIR) band is estimated on the dark pixel assumption
of the water-leaving reflectance in the two NIR bands and then the epsilon spectrum is determined from the
aerosol models. This assumption usually becomes invalid for turbid coastal waters, leading to lost regions in
the satellite imagery masked by the failure of the atmospheric correction. A new approach was developed to
accurately estimate epsilon from turbid coastal waters. This method is based on the idea that the aerosol scattering
reflectance and the epsilon values can be obtained from the known water-leaving reflectance of in situ
measurements. The water-leaving reflectance is determined from the choice of a look-up table of the
water-leaving reflectance based on the Angstrom law of the candidate aerosol scattering reflectance using
the best non-linear least squares fit function. In this approach, the entire epsilon spectra can be obtained
and used to determine the two closest aerosol models which are used to interpolate the actual epsilon values.
It is demonstrated that the results from matching the entire spectra are more robust than that obtained from
using only one epsilon value. The performance of the approach was evaluated using the simulated reflectance
at the top of the atmosphere, the Sea-viewing Wide Field-of-view Sensor (SeaWiFS) imagery, and in situ
measured aerosol optical thickness. This approach is based on the assumption of the aerosol scattering reflectance
following the Angstrom law instead of the standard dark pixel assumption, named as the ENLF model.
This new assumption is valid for both Case 1 and Case 2 waters, even over terrestrial regions. Therefore, the
ENLF model provides a potential approach for a universal algorithm of the atmospheric correction of satellite
remote sensing data.
1. Introduction
While the Rayleigh scattering radiances can be accurately determined
for use in the atmospheric correction of satellite ocean color
remote sensing data, the aerosol scattering reflectance is the main uncertain
term to be determined. Normally, measurements in two
near-infrared (NIR) bands are used to retrieve the aerosol properties
on the assumption of zero water-leaving reflectance at these bands.
However, this assumption is not valid in either Case 2 or highly productive
Case 1 waters, leading to the failure of the atmospheric correction
(Mao et al., 2012; Wang & Shi, 2005). Several approaches
have been developed to overcome this problem for relatively ideal
satellite imagery over turbid waters. These include using the aerosol
scattering reflectance over neighboring clear waters for Case 2 waters
(Hu et al., 2000; Mao et al., 2001), assuming spatial homogeneity of
the NIR band ratio (Ruddick et al., 2000), employing spectral shape
matching methods (Shanmugan & Ahn, 2007), or using a regional
empirical relationship between water reflectance at the red and NIR
bands (Ahn et al., 2012). However, since the spatial and temporal distributions
of aerosols usually vary greatly in the satellite imagery,
these approaches have limited use in operational satellite data processing
systems. The two short wave infrared (SWIR, 1.24 and
1.64 μm) bands were used for atmospheric correction for Moderate
resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) data because the
dark pixel assumption (DPA) was valid in the SWIR bands over turbid
waters (Wang, 2007; Wang & Shi, 2005). However, Knaeps et al.
(2012) pointed out that slight radiance contributions in the 1.24 μm
band were observed in extremely turbid waters and a modification
of the SWIR algorithm was needed.
The ratio of the aerosol scattering reflectance in two NIR bands is
used to obtain the epsilon spectrum on the matchup of aerosol
models. This spectrum is used to extrapolate the magnitudes of the
aerosol scattering reflectance at visible bands from the value at NIR.
According to Wang (2007), when the Sea-viewing Wide Field-ofview
Sensor (SeaWiFS) Band 8 (0.865 μm) is used as a reference,
the epsilon values at Band 1 (0.412 μm) vary between 0.9 (O99
model) and 2.6 (T50 model), implying that the magnitudes of the
aerosol scattering reflectance can vary about 3 fold depending upon
the choice of aerosol models. Therefore, correctly estimating epsilon
becomes one of the critical factors affecting the estimate of the
water-leaving reflectance. More concerning, when the SWIR band
(2.130 μm) is used as a reference band, the magnitudes of epsilon at
0.340 μm vary between 0.7 and 22.6, leading to a more than 30 fold
variation of the aerosol scattering reflectance for the same aerosol optical
thickness (AOT). It should be noted that the accuracy of the atmospheric
correction is much more sensible to epsilon values when
SWIR bands are used and high signal to noise ratio of the sensor is
needed for these bands. In fact, since SWIR bands have in general
lower SNR values than visible and NIR bands (Knaeps et al., 2012),
it obviously limits the accuracy of the atmospheric correction when
the dark pixel assumption (DPA) method of SWIR bands is applied.
The problemof the atmospheric correction in Case 2waters is caused
by that both the aerosol scattering reflectance and thewater-leaving reflectance
become unknown terms. If the water-leaving reflectance becomes
a known term, the aerosol scattering reflectance can then be
extracted and the epsilon values are accurately estimated. Therefore, it
is critical to determine the water-leaving reflectance in the approach
of epsilon estimation for Case 2 waters.
In the standard atmospheric correction procedure, twelve aerosol
models have been used to define the epsilon values for different geometric
angles (Gordon & Wang, 1994). The epsilon value extracted
from the aerosol scattering reflectance in the two SWIR (or NIR)
bands is used to find the two closest aerosol models for interpolation.
Due to amplifying effects of epsilon extrapolated from SWIR to visible
bands, the aerosol scattering reflectance in the visible bands is sensitive
to the small variations of epsilon in the SWIR band. For example,
a small calibration error in MODIS data for the two SWIR bands will
lead to a small error of the retrieval epsilon in those bands (Wang &
Shi, 2005), but the error may be amplified by 10 times for other
bands. If the epsilon spectra over all bands could be obtained and
used to find the two closest aerosol models, the results would become
much more robust.
In this paper,we developed a newapproach to estimate epsilon that
is suitable for both turbid coastal regions and oceanic waters. The AOT
measurements from the Aerosol Robotic Network (AERONET) are
used to analyze the relationship of the aerosol scattering reflectance
among different bands in Section 3. A look-up table of the typical
water-leaving reflectance is established using the in situ measurements
fromthe East China Sea (ECS) in Section 4. A detailed description of the
epsilon approach is given in Section 5. The performance of the approach
is evaluated in Section 6, with the first subsection (Section 6.1) analyzing
simulated reflectance data, the second subsection (Section 6.2)
comparing results applied to SeaWiFS data with the standard method,
and the third subsection (Section 6.3) comparing the match-up between
SeaWiFS data and in situ AOT results, and the accuracy of epsilon
is evaluated. Comparisons are made among different values of the
water-leaving reflectance in the look-up tables presented in the Discussion
section (Section 7).
2. The epsilon problem of the standard atmospheric correction in
Case 2 waters
It is well known that the processing of satellite data using the
standard atmospheric correction usually fails over turbid coastal regions.
One of the main reasons is the difficulty in accurately determining
the epsilon values because the water-leaving radiance in the
two NIR bands are usually much higher than zero in the coastal waters.
An example of epsilon computed from a SeaWiFS image using
the DPA method is shown in Fig. 1.
In coastal regions, the epsilon values in the NIR band are around
1.4, which is roughly 30% higher than its mean value. If these values
are used to extrapolate epsilon to the other wavelength bands, the
value in SeaWiFS Band 1 (0.412 μm) becomes 7.63 which may overestimate
the aerosol scattering reflectance by at least 4.5 times of its
actual value. The overestimation of the aerosol scattering reflectance
will lead to significantly underestimating the magnitudes of the
water-leaving reflectance in visible bands, even generating some negative
values (Shanmugan & Ahn, 2007; Shi &Wang, 2007). The failure
of the atmospheric correction leaves lost regions in the satellite imagery,
over 52,000 km2 in this image. These regions cover the estuary
and coastal zones, very important for the interaction between the terrestrial
and marine environments.
This overestimation is easily detected and its primary cause is that
the water-leaving reflectance is wrongly attributed as part of the
aerosol scattering reflectance in the two NIR bands. There are also
other factors that affect the estimation of epsilon in NIR band, such
as the bias of satellite sensor calibration, uncertainty of the Rayleigh
scattering reflectance, and absorption effects of atmospheric gases.
For example, the O2 A-band absorption may reduce the SeaWiFS measured
reflectance in Band 7 by more than 10–15% (Ding & Gordon,
1995; Wang, 1999). These factors definitely affect the accuracy of
the epsilon estimates, although they are usually difficult to be
detected in satellite imagery. However, due to the amplifying effects
of the extrapolation of epsilon, a small bias in epsilon in the NIR
band may easily lead to a relatively large error in the water-leaving
reflectance at shorter wavelengths. An uncertainty of 5% is assumed
to exist in the NIR band. It then causes the choice of different aerosol
models with a variation of epsilon 0.77 at Band 1, 34% higher than the
true value. A poor selection of the aerosol models may also produce
artifact errors in the processed products (Wang, 2003b). It is important
to establish a suitable approach to accurately estimate the epsilon
for the atmospheric correction.
3. Nonlinear fit of the aerosol scattering reflectance from AOT of
AERONET measurement
As epsilon is used to extrapolate the aerosol reflectance to visible
bands, it is important to understand the relationship of epsilon values
over different bands. The Angstrom constant is usually used to estimate
the epsilon relationship (Gordon & Castano, 1987). However,
Wang and Gordon (1994) concluded that an exponential relationship
would be more accurate for extrapolating epsilon to the other bands.
It is necessary to precisely determine the relationship of epsilon in
visible bands to the NIR band. The AOT dataset of AERONET was
compiled from global distributed data, providing an excellent data
source to analyze the aerosol properties.
AERONET is a ground-based, optical aerosol monitoring network
used to validate the remote sensing algorithmand to ensure the quality
of aerosol products (Holben et al., 1998). The network hardware consists
of automatic Sun–sky scanning radiometers to measure both the
direct and diffuse radiance,which can be used to retrieve aerosol optical
properties such as the AOT, aerosol particle size distribution, complex
refractive index and single scattering albedo (Dubovik et al., 2000).
Data quality control is employed to eliminate errors caused bymeasurement
conditions, such as clouds and biomass burning events (Smirnov
et al., 2000). AERONET has been extended to other applications. For example,
the ocean color component of AERONET (AERONET-OC) has
been used to support long-term satellite ocean color investigations of
autonomous radiometer systems deployed on offshore fixed platforms
(Zibordi et al., 2009a,b).
We obtained AOT data from the AERONET project web page
(http://aeronet.gsfc.nasa.gov). There are a total of 554 measurement
sites in the world, with a total of 7.69 million AOT spectra having
been obtained. Measurements are taken in 16 wavelength bands
ranging from 0.340 to 1.640 μm, with 13 bands selected for wavelengths
from 0.412 to 1.020 μm. Some sites started measurements
from 1999 to now, whereas some just came on-line in 2010. The
number of AOT spectra at each site varies widely, from a maximum
of 65,530 spectra at one site down to a minimum of 12. Because several
different types of instruments are used among these sites, the
spectra bands of AOT measured are different from one site to another.
The site locations are distributed over islands, coastal areas, inland
sites and mountains. Because our focus is on the aerosol types around
the ocean, the 165 sites selected are at altitudes less than 50 m above
sea level with most located near the coastal regions. Some statistical
information on the chosen sites is listed in Table 1.
The mean of the AOT over all spectra is around 0.2, with values decreasing
from0.265 to 0.112 as the wavelength increases. The standard
deviation (STD) of AOT shows a similar pattern to themean values. The
5% lower tail of the total spectral distribution occurs around 0.03 with
minimaclose to zero. The 95% upper tail of the total spectral distribution
occurs around 0.5 with the maxima exceeding 2.0. Since most sites
measured the AOT at 0.440, 0.500, 0.675, 0.870 and 1.020 μm, a set of
AOT collected from 120 sites was established with more than 1.48 million
spectra in these five bands.
According to Gordon and Castano (1989), the aerosol single scattering
reflectance can be calculated from the AOT spectra as:
where ρAS(λ) is the aerosol single scattering reflectance at the top of
the atmosphere (TOA), τa(λ) is the aerosol optical thickness measured
by AERONET, ωa(λ) is the aerosol single scattering albedo,
and Pa(λ) is the aerosol scattering phase function. As many of the
AOT values are higher than 0.1, multiple scattering effects need to
be considered. The aerosol scattering reflectance can be obtained
from where a, b and c are the coefficients of the least squares polynomial fit
which depend on the aerosol models.
As the spectral variations of the AOT of AERONET are quite similar,
it is possible to find a simple equation to describe them. For example,
ρA(λ) is usually assumed to follow the Angstrom law:
where n is the wavelength independent Angstrom exponent, λi is the
wavelength of AERONET band i and λ0 is the reference bandwavelength.
Using the aerosol models from the LOWTRAN-6 models, Wang
and Gordon (1994) concluded that the exponential equation provides
more accurate results than the Angstrom law:
where c is also a constant that depends on the aerosol models chosen
and the viewing geometry.
The extensive measurement set from AERONET provides an excellent
data source for evaluating spectral variations of the aerosol scattering
reflectance. To compare the quality of the spectral fitting functions
for both the Angstrom law and an exponential equation, four aerosol
scattering reflectance of the Mean, Mean plus STD (MS), 5% (P5) and
95% (P95) are selected. The results based on the Angstrom law are
shown in Fig. 2a and those based on the exponential equation are
shown in Fig. 2b.
There are some differences between the observed aerosol spectra
and the fitted spectra for both the Angstrom law and the exponential
equation. The mean relative errors of the P5, Mean, MS, and P95 for
the Angstrom fit are 1.21%, 1.41%, 3.53%, and 0.95%, respectively,
while those for the exponential fit are 4.02%, 4.05%, 6.32%, and
3.71%, respectively. Comparing the fitted situations in Fig. 2, The Angstrom
law is more suitable to describe the spectral shapes of the aerosol
scattering reflectance than the exponential equation.
The nonlinear fit is applied to individual spectrum of AOT and the
mean relative error is calculated from every site, with the results
shown in Fig. 3. The mean relative errors of the fitted aerosol scattering
reflectance are relatively small with most values less than 0.5%.
Half of the sites have errors that are less than 0.16% and 0.30% for
the Angstrom and exponential fits, respectively, with the mean
value of errors of 0.27% and 0.43%, respectively.
When the fitting function is applied to individual spectra the mean
errors become much smaller. The overall average error of the Angstrom
fit is 0.29% and of the exponential fit is 0.47%. Therefore, both
the Angstrom law and the exponential equations provide suitable
fits to the aerosol scattering reflectance data, and because it has a
slightly lower mean error the Angstrom law is used in the remainder
of this paper.
4. The look-up table of in situ water-leaving reflectance
Four cruises were conducted to directly measure the water-leaving
reflectance in the summer and winter of 2006 and in the spring and autumn
of 2007. Each cruise employed two ships (Haijian 46 and Haijian
49) and took about two months to complete the 514 pre-planned stations
in the ECS. The reflectancewas measured by a hyper-spectral spectrometer
manufactured by Analytical Spectral Devices Inc. (ASD). The
ASD instrument was operated following the protocol of the abovewatermethod
(Mueller et al., 2000). As the reflectance can only bemeasured
in the daytime, the actual number of measurement stations was
136, 48, 132, and 143 during the summer, winter, spring, and autumn
cruises, respectively. The spatial distribution of stations is shown in
Fig. 4.
The ASD instrument measures the downward irradiance incident
on the top of a gray plate, the reflected radiance from the sea surface,
and the sky radiance. Each radiance measurement consists of a group
of 20 continuous, simultaneous spectra which can be used to help detect
and remove spectral results contaminated by changes in the environmental
conditions. The methods of Hooker et al. (2002) were
followed to obtain the water-leaving reflectance. The wavelengths
measured by the ASD are from 0.325 to 1.075 μm and the reflectances
in eight bands are computed by the spectral averaging method
according to the SeaWiFS response functions (Mao et al., 2012). A
total of 1496 spectra were measured and 100 spectra were selected
to establish a look-up table of the water-leaving reflectance (Fig. 5).
To make the water-leaving reflectance in the look-up table represent
different types of water in the ECS, a method of selection was developed.
The in situ measured spectra were sorted by the magnitudes
of the reflectance and 100 spectra were selected according to their
position in the magnitude distribution from 0.5% to 99.5% with a 1%
increment. From Fig. 5, the range of the reflectance is large in all 8
bands, even the two NIR bands. The reflectance in Bands 7 and 8
ranges from 0 to 0.06 sr−1, which exceeds the variability of the reflectance
even at visible bands. Obviously, the assumption of zero
water-leaving reflectance is invalid for most of these spectra. These
spectra are used to establish the look-up table of the water-leaving
reflectance to determine the distribution of the actual reflectance in
the ECS.
5. A new approach to estimate the epsilon value from satellite data
The Rayleigh scattering reflectance, the sun glint and whitecap reflectance
can be computed in the atmospheric correction procedure
of satellite data. When the water-leaving reflectance in the two NIR
bands is assumed to be zero, the aerosol scattering reflectance can
be obtained and used to compute epsilon. However, over turbid waters,
this assumption is not valid and its use leads to errors in the estimation
of the epsilon. On the other hand, if the water-leaving
radiance can be determined, the epsilon can be estimated from the
aerosol scattering reflectance over turbid waters.
We define the aerosol–water reflectance, ρAW(λ), including the
aerosol scattering reflectance and the water-leaving reflectance at
TOA, as:
where ρA(λ) is the aerosol scattering reflectance (including Rayleigh–
aerosol interactions) and ρw(λ) is the water-leaving reflectance at
TOA. The aerosol–water reflectance can be deduced from the following:
where ρt(λ) is the satellite measured reflectance at the TOA, ρr(λ) is
the Rayleigh scattering reflectance, T(λ) is the diffuse transmittance
of the atmosphere, and t(λ) is the direct transmittance of the atmosphere.
The term ρwc(λ) is the ocean whitecap reflectance, and
ρg(λ) represents the effects of sun glitter off of the sea surface. The
Rayleigh reflectance can be computed exactly from the Rayleigh lookup
tables based on the vector radiative transfer theory (Wang,
2003a). The whitecap reflectance can be modeled from the sea surface
wind speed (Moore et al., 1999). The sun glint reflectance can
be computed from the sea surface slope distribution (Cox & Munk,
1954). Therefore, ρAW(λ) can be accurately estimated by Eq. (6).
When the water-leaving reflectance is known, ρA(λ), which can be
obtained from the aerosol–water reflectance using Eq. (5), can be
used to estimate the aerosol single scattering reflectance from
where a, b and c are the same coefficients as in Eq. (2). The epsilon spectrum
of the aerosol single scattering reflectance is then defined as
The approach to estimate the epsilon value from the reflectance at
TOA can be summarized as follows:
(1) The Rayleigh scattering reflectance is accurately computed from
themultiple scatteringmethod and the reflectance caused by the
sun-glint and whitecaps is estimated. Then, the aerosol–water
reflectance is obtained from the satellite measured reflectance
using Eq. (6).
(2) A look-up table of the water-leaving reflectance is established
from in situ measurements over the ECS to represent different
types of reflectance.
(3) The candidate aerosol scattering reflectance can be obtained by
subtracting the aerosol–water reflectance from all water-leaving
reflectance in the look-up table, fromwhich with negative values
are removed. The number of the candidate aerosol scattering reflectance
is the same as the reflectance in the look-up table if no
spectra are removed.
(4) The nonlinear least squares fit function based on the Angstrom
lawis used to obtain the best fitted spectrumfor every candidate
aerosol scattering reflectance to compute the difference. The one
with the smallest difference is selected as the actual aerosol
scattering reflectance.
(5) The aerosol single scattering reflectance is estimated from the
aerosol scattering reflectance using Eq. (7), which is then used
in Eq. (8) to obtain the epsilon spectrum.
(6) The epsilon spectrum is used to match the two closest aerosol
models for interpolation to obtain the actual epsilon values.
Matching of the entire spectrum instead of just one value in the
NIR band provides a more stable estimate of epsilon.
Overall, this approach to estimate the epsilon primarily relies on
the assumption of the aerosol scattering reflectance following the
Angstrom law by using the non-linear fit function of the reflectance
under the help of the look-up table of the water-leaving reflectance,
named as the ENLF model.
6. Evaluation of the ENLF model
6.1. Evaluating the ENLF model using the simulation method
The sensor reflectance at the TOA can be simulated from the sum
of its components (Mao et al., 2010). To evaluate the performance
of the ENLF model, only the aerosol–water reflectance needs to be
simulated. The water-leaving reflectance at the TOA can be estimated
from the spectra of the look-up table using:
ρwðλÞ ¼ tðλÞρwnðλÞ cos θs ð Þ; ð9Þ
where ρwn(λ) is the normalized water-leaving reflectance from the
look-up table, θs is the solar-zenith angle and t(λ) is the direct transmittance
of the atmosphere which can be estimated by the method of
Gordon and Wang (1992). The aerosol scattering reflectance in the
reference band is calculated using Eq. (1) with an AOT of 0.12 and
the reflectance in other bands are obtained using Eq. (3) with an Angstrom
constant of 1.1. These parameter values are close to the mean
of the AOT in the AERONET. This aerosol scattering reflectance and
epsilon are taken as the reference to test the performance of the
ENLF model for simulated data. The simulated aerosol–water reflectance
at the TOA is obtained using Eq. (5).
Following the procedure of the ENLF model, the aerosol single
scattering reflectance is obtained from the simulated data using
Steps 2 to 5, and then the epsilon is computed. A total of 1496 epsilon
spectra were obtained, and it is infeasible to show them in one figure.
Therefore, five typical epsilon spectra with different relative errors
are selected and shown in Fig. 6, together with the reference epsilon.
In general, most of the epsilon spectra (not shown) are relatively
close to the reference one and are similar to Spectra 2 results. Still,
there are some spectra with larger variability such as the result of
Spectra 3. The aerosol–water reflectance at the TOA is sensitive to
the settings of several parameters and these parameters become unknown
when the reflectance is used to retrieve the epsilon with the
ENLF model. For example, the water-leaving reflectance at the TOA
simulated from the in situ measurements depends upon the transmittance
of the atmosphere, which becomes difficult to be extracted exactly
from the simulated reflectance. This situation will also happen
when retrieving the epsilon from satellite remote sensing data using
the ENLF model.
Most of the retrieved epsilon spectra followthe Angstromlaw,while
some shapes of epsilon modulate according to the wavelengths, for example,
Spectra 1, 3 and 5 in Fig. 6. These spectra need to be corrected.
Since the epsilon shapes in the aerosolmodels can be taken as the actual
spectra distribution of the aerosol scattering reflectance, the retrieved
epsilon spectra are used tomatch the two closest aerosol models for interpolation
to obtain the actual values. The 12 aerosol models are defined
as O99, M50, M70, M90, M99, C50, C70, C90, C99, T50, T90 and
T99, where the symbol O, M, C, and T refer to oceanic,maritime, coastal
and tropospheric models, respectively, and the numbers designate the
relative humidity. These models produce the epsilon spectra in the
SeaWiFS bands under different solar-sensor geometry. Normally,
these epsilon spectra are used to extrapolate the values in visible
bands depending on the selection of the aerosol models in the NIR
band. The selections are based on the match-up conditions of epsilon
between the measured values from the remote sensing data and the
modeled values. As the spectra of epsilon are obtained, they can be
used to match the two closest spectra of the aerosol models instead of
one value in the NIR band. These two aerosol models are used to
interpolate the actual epsilon values. The five spectra in Fig. 6 are used
to test this match-up method and the results are shown in Fig. 7,
superimposed on the original ones.
Fig. 7 shows that the match-up method of epsilon can significantly
modify the shape of the epsilon spectra and improve the accuracy of
the retrieved epsilon. For example, the retrieved Spectrum 3 is obviously
abnormal from the shape of epsilon and it becomes similar to
the reference one after the use of the match-up method. The relative
error of the retrieved Spectrum 3 is 12.5% and it is 2.3% for the
matched epsilon. As the satellite data are affected by many different
measured conditions, it is difficult to ensure that all reflectance are
perfect. The retrieval spectra depend on many factors; such as the
matched situation of the water-leaving reflectance between the actual
values and the look-up table, the calibration accuracy of the satellite
sensor, the Rayleigh scattering reflectance and the effects of
atmospheric absorption. In fact, some abnormal spectra similar to
Spectra in Fig. 6 are usually found in the satellite imagery. The
match-up method is useful in removing some abnormal variations
of the spectra. The results in Fig. 7 show that the matched epsilon
does follow the Angstrom law closely and fit the epsilon spectra produced
by the aerosol models. As a consequence, the accuracy of the
epsilon estimate can also be improved.
Normally, only one value of epsilon in the NIR band is used to determine
the two closest aerosol models and to extrapolate to other
values in the visible bands. However, the results depend directly on
the accuracy of the aerosol scattering reflectance in the two NIR
bands. For example, the matched epsilon value of Spectrum 3 at
Band 1 (0.412 μm) will be 7.5, 3.4 fold of the true value by the one
value matched method. The mean relative error of the spectrum is
111.1%. The variations of the five spectra at Band 1 are between
1.95 and 7.49, much higher than the results of spectra matched method
which range from 1.54 to 2.34. A small error in the reflectance will
easily lead to a bias of epsilon in the NIR band and an amplified error
in reflectance at shorter wavelengths. If the entire epsilon spectrum
instead of one value at the NIR band is used to determine the two
closest aerosol models, the results are more robust. One advantage
of the ENLF model is that it matches the two aerosol models by
matching the entire epsilon spectrum and thus improves the accuracy
of the epsilon values.
6.2. Evaluating the ENLF model using SeaWiFS imagery
The ENLF model was used to process the SeaWiFS imagery and an
example of an epsilon image in the NIR band is shown in Fig. 8. This
image is produced from the SeaWiFS data from March 27, 2007 and is
the same data used in Fig. 1. To produce this image, first, the Rayleigh
scattering reflectance was computed using a multiple scattering approach
together with the reflectance components from the ocean
whitecaps and the sun glitter off of the sea surface. The aerosol–water
reflectance was obtained from the satellite measured reflectance using
Eq. (6). Finally the aerosol scattering reflectance and the epsilon spectra
were obtained from the ENLF model
From the refined epsilon distribution in Fig. 8, we can see that the
high values of epsilon in the coastal regions are significantly reduced,
with values more closely matching to Case 1 waters. The values in the
NIR band are reduced from around 1.4 to 1.05 in the coastal regions.
To compare the differences of the epsilon spectra between Figs. 1
and 8 in detail, the whole region of the image is classified into 4 classes
according to the range of the epsilon values at Band 7 by the DPA
method. Class 1 represents the range of 1.0 to 1.1, 2 is from 1.1 to 1.2,
3 is from 1.2 to 1.3 and 4 is from 1.3 to 1.5. The epsilon spectra belonging
to the same class are averaged to obtain the mean spectra
of this class, which is shown in Fig. 9.
From Fig. 9, the mean epsilon values between the ENLF model and
the DPA method are large. The ranges of the epsilon values by the
ENLF model are from 1 to 1.7, while those by the DPA method are
from 1 to 5.7. The values by the DPA significantly increase when the
wavelengths shift from the NIR to the blue band, while those by the
ENLF keep much more stable. The spectra by the DPA are significantly
different from Classes 1 to 4, while those by the ENLF are similar.
Checking the true image (not shown in this paper) produced from
SeaWiFS data of this day, the aerosol distributions in the image are relatively
homogeneous. The epsilon values should be close to each other
among the 4 classes. As a result,we conclude that the ENLFmodel is suitable
for application in coastal regions to overcome the overestimation
problem for the epsilon.
Checking carefully the epsilon image in Fig. 8, we can see that this
image shows some information on the spatial structure of the waterleaving
reflectance. However, because the number of the waterleaving
reflectance in the look-up table is limited, there may be a small
difference between the actual water-leaving reflectance and the selected
one from the look-up table. This difference will cause a small error
in extracting epsilon. The match-up method of the ENLF model can improve
the accuracy of epsilon in different bands, but it cannot remove
the effects caused by this difference. It is important to build up a good
look-up table of thewater-leaving reflectance to cover enough actual reflectance
of the regions. It is also necessary to evaluate how the look-up
table of the reflectance affects the accuracy of the epsilon values.
6.3. Evaluating the ENLF model using in-situ measurements
The globally distributed AERONET data can be used to validate the
aerosol products derived from satellite ocean color remote sensing
data such as SeaWiFS (Mélin et al., 2010). The epsilon can be estimated
from the AOT data to validate the results from SeaWiFS data with the
ENLF model. The AOT was measured during the 2006 winter and 2007
autumncruises in the ECS using a handheldmulti-band sun photometer
(MICROTOPS)manufactured by the Solar Light Company. Two different
types ofMICROTOPS instrumentswere used. One is used tomeasure the
total ozone column, the water vapor column and the AOT at 1.020 μm.
The other measures the AOT at the five wavelengths of 0.380, 0.440,
0.500, 0.670 and 0.870 μm. A total of 17 stations during the winter
cruise and 18 stations during the autumncruisewere measured. The instrument
was connected to a GPS system to record the locations and
was used during the transit between stations, significantly increasing
the number of AOT spectra. A total of 4233 spectra were measured at
the locations shown in Fig. 2.
To compare the epsilon values between SeaWiFS and AOT, a
matched data set was assembled using a time window for the satellite
overpass of ±2 h from the in situ measurements. A total of 263
matching spectrawere obtained,withmany SeaWiFS reflectances missing
due to excessive cloud or fog cover. After applying a data quality
check, a set of 49 matched spectra was obtained under the cloud-free
condition of SeaWiFS data. The SeaWiFS reflectances were processed
to obtain the epsilon using the ENLF model and the results are shown
in Fig. 10. The AOT spectra were used to calculate the aerosol scattering
reflectance using the geometric angles of SeaWiFS, to estimate the single
scattering reflectance and finally to obtain the epsilon values which
are also shown in Fig. 10.
Fig. 10 shows that the two types of epsilon are relatively comparable.
While the magnitudes and the spectra shapes are similar to each
other, there are some important differences. Four epsilon spectra of
AOT with green color look abnormal because of their large slopes between
band 1 (0.380 μm) and band 3 (0.500 μm), which are three
times higher than the mean value. The other five spectra have the
similar characteristics, but with relatively small slopes. The slopes of
the AOT epsilon also show some difference from the SeaWiFS epsilon,
especially for the shorter wavelengths.
Because the processing of the data from AOT to epsilon is rather
complicated with several estimated parameters, the accuracy of the
AOT epsilon itself naturally exists some uncertainty. As the AOT data
of AERONET are retrieved from the ground based radiance measurements,
the data quality of AOT can also be affected by the instrument
calibration and the measurement conditions (Dubovik et al., 2000;
Smirnov et al., 2000). The translation fromAOT to the aerosol scattering
reflectance is related to the parameters of the aerosol single albedo and
its phase function, which are determined by the absorption, as well as
the type and particle size distribution of aerosols. The coefficients in
Eq. (3) are determined from the aerosol models, so they rely on different
aerosol models. These parameters were not measured and typical
values were used in the computation of epsilon from the AOT. Finally,
horizontal distributions of aerosolsmay change and a 2-hour timewindow
obviously brings some differences between SeaWiFS and in situ
measurements. Considering these inherent limitations in obtaining
both of the epsilon values, we are satisfied with the results of the comparison
of the two epsilon spectra.
7. Discussion
We find that the epsilon values resulting from satellite data strongly
depend upon the accuracy of the look-up table from the in situmeasured
reflectance. The epsilon can be estimated accurately when the look-up
table covers the actual water-leaving reflectance. Some errors are produced
by the ENLF model when only the closest reflectance is searched
out from the table with some difference between this reflectance and
the actual value. To evaluate how the table affects the accuracy of the epsilon,
a test wasmade. The test was designed to compute the accuracy of
the epsilon using different look-up tables based on different quantities of
the water-leaving reflectance. Seven tables were established including
10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500, and 1000 spectra from the same data set of
the in situ reflectance. The method to establish these tables is that the
spectra are randomly selected with unequal distribution, different from
that in Section 4. All reflectance were used to obtain the aerosol–water
reflectance at TOA using the simulation method in Section 6.1. The epsilon
spectra were estimated from the aerosol–water reflectance by the
ENLF model. The accuracy of the epsilon was computed on the reference
epsilon in Fig. 6 to obtain the mean relative errors shown in Fig. 11.
Fig. 11 is the result of relative errors of the epsilon from7 look-up tables.
It is clear that the errors varywidely among different tables. For example,
when the table only includes 10 spectra, most of the actual
reflectance cannot be found from the table with some large differences
fromthe selected spectra. The mean relative error of the retrieved epsilon
is 64.4%, with the maximumerror of 89% at Band 5.When the numbers
of spectra in the table increase, more actual reflectance can be
found in the table and meanwhile the difference between the actual reflectance
and the selected spectrumbecomes smaller, leading to smaller
errors. The mean relative error is 2.34% when the table includes 1000
spectra. Therefore, the accuracy of the epsilon depends on the look-up
table of the water-leaving reflectance.
The look-up table of the in situ reflectance is the basis for estimating
the epsilon fromthe satellitemeasured reflectance at the TOA using the
ENLF model. As the actual water-leaving reflectance is unknown before
the epsilon is estimated, it is determined from the look-up table with
the best nonlinear least squares fit function using the Angstrom law of
the aerosol scattering radiance. If the actual reflectance exists in the
table, the epsilon can be exactly estimated. Otherwise, a difference between
the actual reflectance and the matched spectra introduces a
bias of epsilon using the ENLF model. If the model is used in other regions,
it is important to obtain enough in situ water-leaving reflectance
data over different seasons in these regions to obtain good estimates.
The atmospheric correction over land is still difficult to establish
with high accuracy. The ENLF model provides a new practical method
to estimate the epsilon spectra for the satellite imagery over land
cover. It depends upon neither the two atmospheric correction bands
nor the dark pixel assumption. It only assumes that the aerosol scattering
reflectance follows the Angstrom law and this assumption is also
valid over land. It depends on the look-up table of in situ reflectance
to separate the aerosol scattering reflectance from the satellite measured
reflectance. The accuracy of the model depends on the distribution
of the reflectance in the look-up table. When a well designed
look-up table is established with different reflectance to represent all
land cover types in different seasons, the ENLF model can then be applied
to the atmospheric correction of satellite remote sensing data
over terrestrial regions.
8. Conclusions
Using awell designed look-up table of thewater-leaving reflectance,
the aerosol scattering reflectance can be determined using the best
non-linear least squares fit function based on the Angstromlaw. The reflectance
is then used to estimate the aerosol single scattering reflectance,
which is then used to determine the epsilon values. The ENLF
model can improve the accuracy of the atmospheric correction of satellite
remote sensing data over turbid coastal waters. The assumption of
the atmospheric correction is changed from the dark pixel assumption
to that the aerosol scattering reflectance following the Angstrom law.
As this new assumption is valid for oceanic, turbid waters and the terrestrial
regions, the ENLF model provides a new potential universal approach
of the atmospheric correction of satellite remote sensing data.
Furthermore, the two NIR atmospheric correction bands are not used
for the ENLF model, which can then be used to estimate the total
suspended matters over turbid waters.
The epsilon spectra are used to determine the two closest aerosol
models instead of relying on one epsilon value from the NIR band. The
results show that this match-up method is more robust and overcomes
the epsilon error caused by small variations of the aerosol scattering
reflectance in the two NIR bands. Meanwhile, this method can
also reduce some abnormal epsilon errors caused by factors including
the data quality of satellite measured reflectance and the mismatch of
the actual water-leaving reflectance with the spectra in the look-up
table. Further, it can also make the shape of the epsilon spectrum
more closely follow the Angstrom law.
The performance of the ENLFmodelwas evaluated by using simulated
reflectance at the TOA, SeaWiFS imagery, and in situ measured AOT
in the ECS. The results show that it can work well under the help of a
properly designed look-up table of the water-leaving reflectance. This
approach can be applied in an operational satellite remote sensing
data processing systemto improve the accuracy of the atmospheric correction
over turbid coastal regions and terrestrial environments.