Title: 
Geological fate of sea?oor massive sulphides at the TAG hydrothermal feld (Mid-Atlantic Ridge)

Author:
Bramley J. Murtona, Berit Lehrmanna, Adeline M. Dutrieuxb, Sofa Martinsc,d,
Alba Gil de la Iglesiaa,f, Iain J. Stobbsb, Fernando J.A.S. Barrigac, J?rg Bialasd, Anke Dannowskid,
Mark E. Vardya,g, Laurence J. Northa, Isobel A.L.M. Yeoa, Paul A.J. Lustye, Sven Petersen

Abstract:
Deep-sea mineral deposits potentially represent vast metal resources that could make a major contribution to
future global raw material supply. Increasing demand for these metals, many of which are required to enable a
low-carbon and high-technology society and to relieve pressure on land-based resources, may result in deep sea
mining within the next decade. Sea?oor massive sulphide (SMS) deposits, containing abundant copper, zinc,
gold and silver, have been the subject of recent and ongoing commercial interest. Although many sea?oor
hydrothermally systems have been studied, inactive SMS deposits are likely more accessible to future mining and
far more abundant, but are often obscured by pelagic sediment and hence difcult to locate. Furthermore, SMS
deposits are three dimensional. Yet, to date, very few have been explored or sampled below the sea?oor. Here,
we describe the most comprehensive study to date of hydrothermally extinct sea?oor massive sulphide (eSMS)
deposits formed at a slow spreading ridge. Our approach involved two research cruises in the summer of 2016 to
the Trans-Atlantic Geotraverse (TAG) hydrothermal feld at 26∼N on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. These expeditions
mapped a number of hydrothermally extinct SMS deposits using an autonomous underwater vehicle and remotely operated vehicle, acquired a combination of geophysical data including sub-sea?oor seismic re?ection
and refraction data from 25 ocean bottom instruments, and recovered core using a robotic lander-type sea?oor
drilling rig. Together, these results that have allowed us to construct a new generic model for extinct sea?oor
massive sulphide deposits indicate the presence of up to fve times more massive sulphide at and below the
sea?oor than was previously thought.

Introduction
Demand for mineral raw materials is increasing as a result of population growth, 
rising living standards, urbanisation and, more recently, the transition to a low-carbon economy (Zepf et al., 2014). Yet
the mining industry faces numerous challenges including rising costs,
reducing ore grades and declining discovery rates of new deposits
(Calvo et al., 2016). As a result, alternative sources of these minerals
are being considered, including the deep-ocean.
Sea?oor massive sulphide deposits, formed through hydrothermal
venting, are considered to be the modern analogous of ancient volcanogenic massive sulphide deposits preserved on land. Although the
number of hydrothermal vent discoveries has been steadily increasing
since the frst discovery at the Galapagos Rift in 1977 (Corliss et al.,
1979), and more than 600 sites are known today (Beaulieu et al., 2015),
the economic importance of the associated SMS deposits is poorly
known. Recent estimates suggest modern hydrothermally active sites
account, globally, for at least 650 million metric tonnes (Mt) of massive
sulphides containing 10 Mt of copper (Cu), 29 Mt of zinc (Zn), 1 Mt of
lead (Pb), 33 Mkg silver (Ag), and 750,000 kg gold (Au) (Hannington
et al., 1999, 2011). Published bulk geochemical data from 95 of these
modern SMS deposits suggest a median grade of 3 wt.-% Cu, 9 wt.-% Zn,
2 g/t Au and 100 g/t Ag (Hannington et al., 2011; Monecke et al.,
2016). However, these analyses are mainly derived from easily recoverable surface grab-samples, such as high-temperature sulphide
chimney and related talus material, and may not be representative of
the average composition of the deposits at depth. It is likely that the
vast majority of SMS deposits are no longer hydrothermally active and
are increasingly covered by pelagic sediment as they age. It remains
unknown what low temperature geological and environmental processes a?ect hydrothermally extinct SMS (eSMS) deposits once the ?ow
of chemically reduced hydrothermal ?uid ceases, whether the metal
tenor becomes enriched, depleted or disappears with time, and what
the structure and composition of these deposits is beneath the sea?oor.
To enhance our understanding of modern eSMS deposits, two research expeditions (M127 on RV Meteor and JC138 on RRS James
Cook) were conducted at the TAG hydrothermal feld at 26∼09∩N,
49∼30∩W, on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, in 2016, as part of the EU-funded
Blue Mining project. The objectives were to determine the sub-sea?oor
morphology, mineralogy, composition and extent of the sulphide mineralisation in eSMS deposits. Here, we report the results of that work
and combine observations based on surface geology, sub-sea?oor drilling and seismic imaging, to yield a new model for eSMS deposits at
slow-spreading ridges.

Geological setting
The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is a slow-spreading (22 mm/year) ridge
(Kleinrock and Humphris, 1996), and the associated TAG hydrothermal
feld is one of the most intensively studied sea?oor hydrothermal systems (e.g. Rona et al., 1975, 1984, 1986; 1993a,b; Humphris et al.,
1995, 2015; Humphris and Kleinrock, 1996; Evans, 1996; Tivey et al.,
1995, 1996; Petersen et al., 2000; DeMartin et al., 2007; Zhao et al.,
2012). It lies at water depths ranging from 3,430 to 3,670 m on the
eastern and shallowest part of a 75 km-long, second-order spreading
segment bounded by two right-lateral non-transform discontinuities at
25∼58∩N and 26∼17∩N (Fig. 1A). The TAG segment is characteristic of
most slow-spreading ridge segments, having a fault-bounded graben,
bound by abyssal hills and faults (here oriented NNW-SSE) forming a
deep axial valley that hosts a neovolcanic zone comprising young lavas,
hummocky volcanic ridges and isolated volcanoes (White et al., 1998).
The active TAG mound is the current locus of venting of high
temperature (up to 363 ∼C) hydrothermal ?uids, that has resulted in the
formation of a 200 m diameter, 50 m high circular deposit topped by a
number of 12 m-tall black-smoker chimneys (Humphris et al., 2015).
During ocean drilling programme (ODP) Leg158, in 1994, seventeen
holes were drilled at fve locations into the active TAG mound
(Humphris et al., 1995). The maximum depth of penetration was 125 m
below sea?oor (mbsf). The holes intersected massive pyrite breccia in
the upper part of the mound overlying anhydrite-rich breccia, below
which a silicifed, pyritised, altered basaltic stockwork was encountered. The lowermost part of the drill holes intersected highly-altered basaltic host rock. Metals of economic interest such as Cu, Zn, Ag
and Au were only found to be enriched in the upper 5 m of the mound
(Hannington et al., 1998) whereas mainly barren massive pyrite body
was identifed below this depth.
Radiometric dating indicates hydrothermal activity at the active
TAG mound frst started 50,000 years ago with episodic periods of activity of tens to hundreds of years (Lalou et al., 1990) characterised by
accumulation and recrystallisation of sulphides, precipitation of substantial amounts of anhydrite, and remobilisation of metals. Intervening
periods of hydrothermal inactivity lasted 3,000 to 5,000 years, during
which mass wasting, anhydrite dissolution and interior brecciation
occurred. The current period of hydrothermal activity at the active TAG
mound commenced about 80 years ago (Lalou et al., 1998).
In addition to the active TAG mound, at least seven other hydrothermally inactive or eSMS deposits have previously been identifed
(Fig. 1B) in an area of ‵2.5 km2 (Rona et al., 1993a,b). The largest
cluster of deposits is known as the Alvin Zone and lies ‵1.5 km northnortheast of the active TAG mound, at a depth of 3,400 to 3,600 m. It
consists of a number of roughly circular individual mounds (Fig. 2A)
that are typically up to 60 m high, 100 to 300 m in diameter, formed
from weathered sulphide talus, variably covered in pelagic and hydrothermal sediment (Humphris et al., 2015 and references therein),
and are between 6,000 to 75,000 years old (Lalou et al., 1990, 1993,
1998). These mounds include Double, Shinkai and Southern (Fig. 2B,C).
Another 200 m diameter area of iron-oxide and weathered sulphide
material, called Shimmering Mound, occurs 1 km to the north of
Shinkai Mound where low temperature ?uids (≒22 ∼C) di?use through
iron-bearing silicates, iron-oxyhydroxides (FeOOH) and iron-manganese oxides (Humphris et al., 2015). During cruise M127 (Petersen and
Shipboard Scientifc party, 2016), further hydrothermal structures were
discovered including a 30 m high, 100 m diameter, dome-shaped
mound, named Rona Mound (Fig. 2D) after the late Peter Rona, who
was the frst to discoverer hydrothermal activity at the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge (Rona et al., 1975, 1984). Two smaller mounds (~20每30 diameter) on the north-eastern and south-eastern side of Shinkai Mound,
are called New Mound #2 and New Mound #3 (Fig. 2A-B).
In addition to the extensive Alvin Zone, a second hydrothermally
inactive site occurs, called the MIR Zone (Fig. 2E). This site is located
two kilometres to the east-northeast of the active TAG Mound in water
depths of 3,430 to 3,575 m. In comparison to the Alvin Zone, this area
lacks mound-like features, and instead comprises a raised area of irregular and undulating sea?oor, several 100∩s m in diameter and a few
10∩s m high, composed of an accumulation of weathered sulphide material and iron-rich sediments with a discontinuous pelagic sediment
cover (White et al., 1998). Rona et al. (1993a) divide the MIR Zone into
three distinct areas. The western part comprises weathered sulphide
debris and hydrothermal sediments that are underlain by hydrothermal
breccia. In contrast, the central zone is dominated by toppled and
standing relict chimneys. No sulphides are recorded from the eastern
zone where FeOOH, iron-rich clays and manganese oxy-hydroxide
(MnOOH) crusts occur. Radiometric dating indicates that hydrothermal
activity commenced 140,000 years ago with the last active episode
ceasing only 600 years ago (Lalou et al., 1993; Humphris and Tivey,
2000).
The TAG hydrothermal feld is a basalt-hosted system (Rona et al.,
1993a,b) and the composition of the vent ?uids and their mineral deposits are consistent with ?uid interaction with a mafc host rock
(Campbell et al., 1988). As such, the TAG hydrothermal feld can be
considered a classic example of a modern, volcanogenic massive sulphide deposit and is distinct from deposits formed in intra-continental
rift zones, back-arc basins and volcanic arcs. Recent studies have shown
that the TAG hydrothermal feld is formed on the hanging wall of an
active detachment fault (Tivey et al., 2003), with seismic data indicating the footwall comprises lower-crustal or serpentinised uppermantle lithologies (DeMartin et al., 2007).
No accurate resource estimates are available for the whole TAG
hydrothermal feld, although attempts have been made using bulk
geochemical data from the literature and combining them with the
volume of the mounds above the surrounding sea?oor under the premise that Alvin and MIR zones consist of similar lithologies to those
observed in the sub-sea?oor beneath the TAG mound. Based on these
data, the mass of sulphides in the active TAG Mound is thought to be up
to 3.9 million tons (Hannington et al., 1998) and the Alvin and MIR
zones each range between 1 to 4 million tons. However, many of the
samples used to estimate the composition of the eSMS mounds are
surface grab material, such as chimney fragments enriched in Cu, Zn,
Au and Ag, and may not be representative of the three-dimensional
deposit at depth.
Until now, the focus of the majority of research in the TAG hydrothermal feld has been on the high-temperature active TAG mound.
Here, we focus on the hydrothermally eSMS deposits in the Alvin and
MIR zones, with the aim to characterise their structure and composition
at depth, and determine common processes a?ecting their evolution,
degradation and preservation on and below the sea?oor.

Method
The data reported here were collected during the EU-funded Blue
Mining programme expeditions M127 (RV Meteor) and JC138 (RRS
James Cook) in May to August 2016. An important and novel aspect of
our study was the collection and integration of geological and geophysical data acquired from the same area. The study area was initially
mapped using the ship＊s multibeam echosounder, followed by autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) missions for high resolution mapping
of the eSMS mounds. These were then imaged using a variety of geophysical methods, that occupied the same profle lines across eSMS
mounds, followed by surveys using a robotic underwater vehicle (RUV)
and drilling by a robotic lander-type sea?oor drilling rig (RD2). From
this body of complementary data we are able to describe the common
features of the eSMS deposits, starting from the surface geology (including exposures of basement in fault scarps) and progressing through
drilled core to a maximum depth of 12.5 mbsf. Whole-rock material
from the core was geochemically and petrologically analysed for major
and trace element variations and sulphide mineralogy. To obtain information on the deeper subsurface, i.e. below the maximum drilling
depth, geophysical methods were used including seismic data acquired
by 25 ocean bottom seismometers placed on and around the eSMS
mounds. These mainly recorded internal re?ections from within the
deposits and the underlying crust, down to depths of ‵400 mbsf.
Refractions from deeper in the crust, down to 3.5 km, were also acquired. Controlled source electromagnetic surveys were also conducted
but the results are presented elsewhere.
3.1. AUV, RUV mapping and surface sampling
Given their water depth (3,600 m) and relatively small size
(100每300 m diameter), high-resolution bathymetry data were acquired
from near the sea?oor using an AUV operated by GEOMAR (Petersen
and Shipboard Scientifc party, 2016) during M127. Multibeam swath
sonar data were acquired from a RESON Seabat 7125 operated at 200/
400 kHz frequencies and processed to a resolution of between 2 and
0.5 m. The AUV was navigated using a long-baseline acoustic system,
and later dead-reckoning using Doppler velocity logging and an Inertial
Navigation System. Multiple missions were undertaken over the TAG
hydrothermal feld, from a variety of altitudes, and the data geographically merged for internal consistency, gridded, and geographically co-registered by locating the images to the 3 m-diameter
steel re-entry cones left by the ODP drilling sites on the active TAG
mound, which have well-known locations. High-resolution maps of the
individual eSMS mounds were generated at a resolution of 0.5 m and
reveal details of the deposits including fault scarps, collapse structures
and extinct chimneys.
The surface geology of the eSMS mounds was studied during the
second cruise (JC138) by videography and sampling from the RUV
HyBIS (Murton et al., 2012), focussing on the Shinkai, Southern and
Rona mounds (Murton and Shipboard Scientifc Party, 2018). Missions
were planned on the basis of the AUV-derived bathymetry maps and
RUV navigation used ultra-short baseline (USBL) with a precision
of ㊣ 5 m and an accuracy of ㊣ 10 m. In total, 52 h of HD video imagery
were obtained during seven dives. A total of twenty-nine HyBIS surface
samples were obtained mainly from Southern Mound, with a few
samples from Rona and Shinkai mounds. These provide information on
the near-sea?oor composition and allowed validation of observations
made from the video images.
3.2. Coring of sediments
Sediment samples were largely collected by 3 m-long gravity coring
to characterise the superfcial sea?oor geology. The thickest sediment
accumulations were identifed from the multibeam bathymetry (being
smooth and having low acoustic backscatter) and shipboard sub-bottom
profler data. Gravity cores were navigated subsea by USBL and acquired from the top and base of the eSMS mounds, and up to several
kilometres away, targeting sediment ponds and areas with thinner sediment. The sediments are classifed as being hydrothermally in?uenced when iron and base metals, such as copper and zinc, exceed the
value found in the background pelagic sediments (carbonate ooze).
Variation in iron and manganese content relate to hydrothermal plume
fall-out, and high-sulphide concentrations are the result of massive
sulphide erosion, transport and deposition.
3.3. Drilling
Following the mapping phase, JC138 deployed the RD2, operated
by British Geological Survey. The RD2 system is capable of coring up to
55 mbsf in water depths up to 4,000 m. Several sensors allow real-time
monitoring of drilling parameters such as revolutions per minute,
torque, bit weight, feed force, feed pressure, feed speed, water ?ow and
water ?ush rates. Landing RD2 on surfaces on the mounds that were ?at
enough and could support the weight of the rig to ensure a fnal inclination of less than 5∼ proved difcult. Despite the relatively precise
navigation provided by our USBL system, these ?at target benches were
no more than 10 m in diameter. To facilitate the fnal landing, ?ashing
beacons were placed on the sea?oor by the RUV HyBIS, following drill
site selection.
3.4. Petrological and geochemical analyses
Full drill cores and sediment gravity cores were described, photographed, split and subsampled on board. Polished thin (30 米m) and
thick sections (200 米m) were made from selected pieces for petrological
and micro-analytical studies using transmitted and re?ected light microscopy.
Bulk geochemical data were obtained from individual or composite
quarter-core pieces of the same lithology. These were crushed, powdered and homogenised with 10 g of each sample being analysed by
Activation Laboratories Ltd. (Actlabs, 2017) in Canada, using: Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis (INNA), sodium peroxide fusion
with Inductively-Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICPOES) & Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) analyses, total sulphur infrared
spectroscopy, and cold vapour ?ow-injection atomic absorption spectrometry. Sediment analysis performed on approximately 100 mg of
acid-digested dried and ground material, after applying an internal
spike of Be, Re and In. Analysis was performed by ICP-OES for major
elements (e.g. Ca, Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn) and by ICP-MS for minor elements and trace element (e.g. Cu for some depths). Precision and accuracy were determined for each analytical run by repeat analysis
(n = 3) of the two Certifed Reference Materials: (i) marine sediments
MESS-1 (National Research Council of Canada) and (ii) sulphide ore
mill tailings RTS-1 (National Research Council of Canada). Elemental
precision for each run was less than 4% and 2.7%, respectively, except
for Zn which was up to 13% by ICP-OES due to a low concentration in
RTS-1 and MESS-1. Silica concentrations in jasper samples were determined by X-Ray Flourescence (XRF) using approximately 0.5 g of
dried, ground and homogenised material, mixed with Lithium Tetraborate ?ux and fused into a glass beads. These were analysed on a
Philips? MagiX-Pro 4 kW using a Rh X-ray tube.
Mineral identifcation in sediment was performed on homogenised
dried powder samples using an X-Ray di?ractometer (MiniFlexII,
Rigaku, Japan) equipped with MiniFlex2 + goniometer and detector.
CuK汐1 radiation (1.541 ?) was applied at 30 kV, with 15 mA of beam
current. The 2牟 incidence angle spanned from 5∼ to 60∼ with a scan
speed of 1.2∼/min using a continuous scan mode. Quartz standards were
also run to ensure calibration. The data were analysed using the
※Panalytical Highscore§ software with reference to the ICDD minerals
database 2018.
3.5. Geophysics
To assess the dimensions and structure of the deep interior of the
TAG eSMS mounds, active seismic experiments were performed using
two di?erent air-gun source arrays: a G-gun array (760 cubic-inch, 2 m
depth, 12 s shot interval) for lines up to 10 km-long, and a GI-gun array
(210 cubic-inch, 6 m depth, 9 s shot interval) for the shorter lines up to
5 km-long, respectively. Twenty Ocean Bottom Seismometers (OBS) and
fve Ocean Bottom Hydrophones (OBH) recorded the airgun shots. To
obtain the internal velocity and gross geometries of the deposits, 10 of
the 20 OBS were placed on top of the Shinkai and Southern mounds by
the RUV HyBIS, with an o?set between instruments of about 75 m for
the central part of the mounds. The other instruments (10 OBS and 10
OBH) were deployed by free-fall along crossing seismic profles with
o?sets of 350每750 m between instruments.
Following acquisition, the OBS records were processed by separating the di?erent shot lines, accurately locating the ocean bottom instruments on the sea?oor, fltering to remove source ringing and ?attening of the records to the frst arrival for easier arrival identifcation/
picking. P-wave velocity-depth models for the profles were then generated by forwarding modelling the travel-times using the RAYINVR
ray-tracing software (Zelt and Smith, 1992). Starting conditions, used
to set the initial boundary conditions in the inversion modelling, were
based on laboratory measured seismic velocities for materials recovered
during ODP drilling of the active TAG mound (Table 1). The model was
iterated to establish new velocities for the eSMS mounds that minimise
the misft between the observed and modelled arrivals. Fig. 3 shows
examples for OBS #04, located on the ?ank of Shinkai mounds, and the
best-ft solutions (in black) between the velocity model and the arrivals
picked from the seismic records

Result
4.1. Geology of the TAG hydrothermal feld
Multibeam swath bathymetry mapping of the TAG hydrothermal
feld shows signifcant variability in tectonic and volcanic processes.
The central part of the TAG hydrothermal feld is characterized by
hummocky volcanic lavas that coalesce into mounds, 100每500 m in
diameter, forming a neovolcanic zone ‵1 km to the west of the eSMS
mounds (Fig. 1B). The westernmost part of the area generally comprises
unfaulted hummocky lava mounds and ridges, including a frozen lavalake ‵500 m to the east of the active TAG mound. In the centre of the
TAG hydrothermal feld, a zone of extensional faulting is dominated by
NNE-SSW strikes (Fig. 2A). At ‵29∼09.5∩N, these fault traces bend towards a N-S trend southward, indicative of left-lateral shear. The convergence of these fault orientations coincides with the Alvin Zone,
where the most prominent eSMS mounds are located, and they are
thought to control hydrothermal ?uid pathways from deep within the
crust (Karson and Rona, 1990; Kleinrock and Humphris, 1996).
4.2. Morphology of eSMS mounds
The highest resolution bathymetry reveals changes in slope and
mass wasting features that indicate relative ages for the eSMS mounds
in the Alvin Zone (Fig. 4). Of these, the Shinkai Mound and the adjacent
New Mounds appear to be younger, based on their steeper slopes and
sharp conical shapes with meter-high pinnacles on the summits, indicative of relict hydrothermal chimneys. Double, Southern and Rona
mounds appear to be older, despite being located only 500 m further to
the east, having much smoother and more rounded features, more dome
like than conical, and being intensely dissected by curved faults. The
gentle slopes and smoothness of these older eSMS mounds re?ects the
presence of a thicker sediment cover and the lack of relict chimney
structures. Shinkai and the New Mounds have average slope gradients
(height/radius) of about 0.5 with average slope angles of 27 ㊣ 3∼. In
contrast, Southern, Double and Rona mounds have average slope gradients of about 0.34每0.39, with average slope angles of 20 ㊣ 1∼, respectively (Table 2). Although there is some uncertainty ( ㊣ 10%) in
these slopes due to asymmetry of the mounds and the true extent of the
edge of the sulphide apron, the di?erences are consistent with the relative age of the mounds, described above.
The MIR Zone lies in the south-east corner of the TAG hydrothermal
feld, on an elevated block formed by a west-facing fault that runs for
over a kilometre in a N每S direction (Fig. 2E). It comprises a
(450 m ℅ 300 m), oval-shaped zone of inactive sulphides and relict
chimneys, and the constructive feature is smaller than previously
thought (Rona et al., 1993b). Small mound-like features are arranged
around the circumference of the MIR Zone that is incised by slump
structures and scours on both the SE and NW sides where mass-wasted
blocks and rubble appear to have ?owed down-slope.
4.3 Surface geology of the eSMS mounds
Five of the eSMS mounds (Shinkai, the New Mounds, Southern and
Rona) were surveyed by the RUV HyBIS in detail, and the geological
map produced for Southern Mound is the most comprehensive (Fig. 5).
The majority of Southern and Rona mounds are covered by thin pelagic
sediment. NE每SW trending, conjugate inward dipping and arcuate, low
4.4. Surface lithologies from the eSMS mounds
Surface samples from the eSMS mounds comprise both chimney
fragments and massive sulphide blocks (Fig. 7A每C). Chimney fragments
were only recovered from Shinkai Mound and the New Mounds and
include intact ?uid conduits lined by marcasite, idaite, covellite with
chalcopyrite closer to the outside. Other chimney fragments are composed of chalcopyrite with traces of isocubanite, marcasite and pyrite
hosted in a matrix of amorphous silica.
At Southern Mound, the surface material includes massive pyrite
breccia and layered massive sulphides comprising pyrite and/or marcasite, chalcopyrite and minor chalcocite. The external surfaces of these
samples are coated by a thin FeOOH layer and associated atacamite,
jarosite and minerals of the quartz-group or opal, indicating low-temperature seawater-related weathering. The interiors comprise mainly
porous massive pyrite, with either cubic or coarse-grained subhedral
textures with the latter resulting from high-temperature recrystallization (Fig. 7G). Locally, micro-sized inclusions of sphalerite and/or
chalcopyrite occur within massive, porous, colloform and coarsegrained subhedral pyrite (Fig. 7N,O). Sometimes, this pyrite is overgrown by chalcopyrite,
 that has altered to chalcocite along micro-
fractures, or is surrounded by marcasite (Fig. 7N).
At Rona Mound, surface samples comprise mainly massive sulphide
breccia and material from extinct hydrothermal chimneys. These samples contain colloform and recrystallised pyrite, also overgrown by
chalcopyrite and with chalcocite replacement along zones of microfracturing. Here the matrix of the sulphide breccia consists of quartz
with, locally developed, acicular needles of barite.
4.5. Metalliferous sediments
Sediment thickness varies signifcantly across the TAG hydrothermal feld (Fig. 8). Gravity coring, using a 3 m-long corer, recovered
either the full thickness of the sediment column where the basement
was intersected, or penetrated sediments in excess of 3.1 m, based on
recovery from overshoot by the corer where the basement was not intersected. Sediment thickness (Fig. 8A), facies (based on hydrothermal
in?uence) and Cu concentration across the TAG hydrothermal feld is
shown on maps derived from analyses of the core material (Fig. 8B).
The variation in sediment thickness re?ects a combination of topographical and sea?oor age variation. For example, on the summits of
the eSMS mounds, pelagic and hydrothermal sediment thicknesses
range from being largely absent on the summit of Shinkai Mound, to
between 1.67 and 2.78 m on top of Southern Mound, reach up to 2.78 m
on top of Rona Mound, and between 0.7 and 2.0 m on top of the MIR
Zone. This variability correlates with the relative ages of the mounds, as
discussed above.
The mineralogy of the sulphide-rich sediments, closest to the base of
the mounds, consists mainly of pyrite and chalcopyrite, with subordinate sphalerite and seawater alteration products (e.g. paratacamite). These sediments contain up to 39 wt.-% Fe, 17.2 wt.-% Cu
and 203 ppb Au. In a proximal channel, extending to the south-east of
Southern Mound, a thickness of at least 10 m of metalliferous sediment
was found exposed in fault scarps several hundred metres from the base
of the mound. Here, the sediments comprise alternating centimetrescale layers of fning-upward, fne-grained FeOOH and sulphide (pyrite
and chalcopyrite) sands intercalated with pelagic carbonate ooze enriched in iron oxides (Fig. 9). These mineralogically and texturally
immature sediments indicate rapid deposition as a result of mass
wasting of weathered and oxidised hydrothermal chimney materials
that are rapidly buried by further sediment deposition. Copper concentrations in these sediments are relatively high, reaching up to
10 wt.-%. Pelagic carbonate layers indicate pauses in hydrothermal
sediment deposition. The dip of layers within some of these cores decreases from ‵30∼ at the base to near zero at the top, re?ecting local
and progressive tilting of the basement, probably in response to NW
dipping faults that dissect the channel. Coring and sea?oor video surveys traced the channel for at least 1 km to the south-east of the eSMS
mounds.
In summary, the surface geology reveals a similar structure for a
number of eSMS mounds in the TAG hydrothermal feld. The tops and
?anks of the mounds are composed of unsorted sulphide-talus with
iron-oxide sediment, and often largely draped in a veil of pelagic carbonate ooze. The extent and thickness of the pelagic sediment, the
presence of relict hydrothermal structures, and the aspect ratios and
slopes of the mounds re?ects their relative age. The lower slopes and
margins of the mounds are covered by hydrothermal sediments forming
upwards-fning layers of sulphide sands and iron oxides. Some of these
are intercalated with pelagic carbonates indicating pauses in hydrothermal sediment deposition. The presence of inward dipping, arcuate
faults appears to be a common feature and also correlates with increasing age and size of the mounds, with the oldest and largest having
the most prominent fault structures. Exposure of the interior of the
mounds is limited to these fault scarps and reveals a sequence of pelagic
sediment overlying metalliferous turbidite sediments that in turn overly
massive sulphide breccia that on-laps a basaltic basement of pillow
lavas.
4.6. Drilling results
A total of eight holes were drilled on the top of the eSMS deposits at
Southern, Rona and MIR (Fig. 2C每E), yielding a total core recovery of
9.51 m, with an average recovery of 29.2%, and a maximum penetration of 12.5 mbsf (Table 3). A general down-hole stratigraphy is shown
in Fig. 10, with depths of lithologies reconstructed by correlating recovered core with drilling telemetry (e.g., weight on bit, torque, rotation speed and penetration rate). Geochemical compositions are reported for averages of quarter core sections, and discrete facies, up to
0.25 m long. A common lithological sequence was observed at all three
eSMS mounds including: a layer of pelagic and metalliferous sediment
overlying a layer of dense jasper, several metres thick, that transitions
downwards into massive brecciated sulphide dominated by pyrite with
chalcopyrite overgrowths and veins.
4.6.1. Southern Mound
At the summit of Southern Mound, core was obtained from three
drill holes (stations 022, 031 and 050) (Fig. 10A). The uppermost layer
comprises pelagic carbonate sediment, up to 20 cm thick, underlain by
2.5每3.5 m of orange-brown to reddish coloured, soft and
unconsolidated hydrothermal sediment with oxidised, relict chimney
fragments, confrming observations and samples obtained by the RUV
HyBIS. This material mainly comprises iron-rich clays and rare, centimetre-thick, blackish MnOOH layers, e.g., at 1.8 mbsf. Beneath the ironrich sediments, a layer up to 3.1 m thick of jasper (silica-rich iron
stained material) occurs. This merges downwards into an intercalated,
0.6 m-thick layer of brecciated jasper at around 5.40每5.85 mbsf. The
jasper is quite heterogeneous in appearance, showing a range of colours
from orange (upper layers 每 Fig. 11A-B), to dark red (main portion 每
Fig. 11C-D), to mottled red每orange and grey (e.g. near the base 每
Fig. 11E), and it has variable porosity of 5每20%, measured from thin
sections. The upper-most portion of the jasper layer has vuggy and
sponge-like texture (Fig. 11G) and contains trace quantities of disseminated pyrite that become increasingly massive with depth
(Fig. 11I). The main minerals in the red jasper and jasper breccia are
quartz (‵55每90%) and hematite (‵5每40%), whereas the more massive
orange coloured jasper is typically composed of opal-CT, quartz, and
goethite, with minor hematite. The lower-most parts of the jasper layer
are composed of silicifed breccia containing disseminated pyrite and
rare grains of chalcopyrite (Fig. 11F,K, L). Massive sulphide was encountered at the bottom of the hole (6.7 mbsf) and consists of colloidal
pyrite surrounded by recrystallised pyrite that is locally surrounded by
traces of chalcopyrite (Fig. 7D,M)
4.6.2. Rona Mound
At the summit of Rona Mound, cores were obtained from three drill
holes (stations 057, 065, 068 (Fig. 10B). Although the unconsolidated
pelagic and hydrothermal sediments observed from the RUV HyBIS
images were not recovered, drill telemetry data (rapid penetration rate
and low torque) suggest these are about 2.80 m thick. RUV HyBIS observations indicate they are composed of ‵ 30 cm pelagic ooze overlying 2.5 m of iron-rich sediment. Beneath this, a layer up to 2.5 m thick
of dark red, massive textured jasper was encountered, similar to that
found at Southern Mound, but with a lower total porosity of 5%. The
predominant minerals in the jasper are cristobalite/tridymite
(‵80每90%), with subordinate hematite (‵5每10%) and the deepest
part of the jasper contains patches of intermixed goethite and haematite
with traces of pyrite. This transitions into a zone of mixed red and orange-jasper-silica breccia that consists of cristobalite/tridymite with
minor hematite, goethite, disseminated pyrite and (rare) sphalerite.
Beneath this transitional zone, brecciated massive sulphide was encountered down to a depth of 12.5 mbsf. The upper (6每9 mbsf) part is
composed of porous (5每15%) and silicifed marcasite with minor pyrite,
sphalerite and traces of barite (Fig. 7N). The sulphides have a brownish,
colloidal core of coliform pyrite with overgrowths of marcasite and
sphalerite. The lower (9每12.5 mbsf) part is composed of massive colloidal textured pyrite, frequently surrounded by recrystallised pyrite
that, in turn, is surrounded by chalcopyrite overgrown by sphalerite
(Fig. 7L,O)
4.6.3. MIR Zone
At the MIR Zone, two holes were drilled (stations 073, 076) on a
small platform on the inner north-eastern side of the deposit (Fig. 10C).
Pelagic sediments, with a thickness of 18 cm, are underlain by hydrothermal iron-rich sediments extending down to a depth of 70 cm,
overlying a ‵10 cm thick layer of FeOOH. This is underlain by a 2.8 m
thick zone of jasper, similar to that encountered at Southern and Rona
mounds. Here, the jasper ranges from red to orange and has a mean
porosity of 15每5%. The red jasper consists of quartz (‵55每85%) and
hematite (‵5每35%), with traces of pyrite. The orange jasper is mineralogically distinct, containing quartz (‵60每70%), hematite
(‵5每15%) and FeOOH (‵10%) but no sulphides. At about 3.6 mbsf,
slightly porous massive sulphide breccia is present, dominated by pyrite
with minor chalcopyrite occurring in veins and as overgrowths.
4.7 Metal distribution
Although the three SMS mounds drilled have similar lithostratigraphy, the metal distribution between the mounds is variable (Fig. 10,
Table 4). With the exception of Mn-rich horizons or encrustations, both
on the surface and within the sediments, in which Cu concentrations
can reach 1.42 wt-%, the Fe-rich sediments from the summits of the
three sulphide mounds typically have low concentrations of Cu and Zn
(i.e. less than 0.5 wt-%). At Southern Mound, the Fe-rich sediments
have a Mn-rich horizon (14.9 wt-%) at 1.8 mbsf. At the MIR Zone,
Mn〞rich horizons are found at the top (2.47 wt-%) of the Fe-rich sediments and at its base (3.38 wt-%). The Mn-rich horizon deeper in the
sediment profle coincides with a peak in Cu (1 wt-%), which otherwise
remains low (< 0.2 wt-%) until encountering the massive sulphide
zone. At Southern Mound and MIR Zone, the jasper appears to be
barren of metals of economic interest, whereas at Rona Mound, just
above the brecciated transition zone, it displays some enrichment in Zn
(0.98 wt-%).
At all the eSMS mounds we drilled, the massive sulphide zone has
the highest base metal concentrations. For example, at Southern
Mound, Cu concentrations increase to 0.98 wt.-% at the base of the hole
(6.6 mbsf). At Rona Mound, Cu and Zn concentrations also increase
towards the base of the hole, with two peaks in Cu occurring at
8每9 mbsf (5.8 wt.-%) and 12 mbsf (3.2 wt.-%), while Zn concentrations
reach a peak of 8.4 wt.-% between 7.4 and 9 mbsf. At the MIR Zone, Cu
concentrations in the massive sulphide increase downwards, reaching
16.1 wt.-% (at 4每4.5 mbsf), and then remain high, but variable,
reaching a peak of 20.4 wt.-% at 6.4 mbsf (Fig. 10). Covariation of
metals in samples from both the drill core and the surface material is
summarized in Fig. 12. The manganese-rich horizons are distinguished
by having < 1 wt.-% Zn, < 10 wt.-% Si and S, up to 28 wt.-% Cu, and
up to 35 wt.-% Fe. The jaspers and silicifed jasper breccia have up to
45 wt.-% Si and up to 42 wt.-% Fe, but low S, Cu, and Zn. Surface
massive sulphides have low Zn and S concentrations, but some samples
contain elevated values of Cu and Fe, with a clear trend indicating a
mixture of pyrite and Cu-sulphides (Fig. 12). These sulphides contain
the highest concentrations of Cu (up to 42 wt.-%) re?ecting both the
presence of chalcopyrite and possibly bornite. The sub-sea?oor
sulphides are dominated by pyrite with low Zn (one sample has up to
8.6 wt.-%) and low Si concentrations. Some samples contain up to
20 wt.-% Cu, especially those from the greatest depth below sea?oor. A
single sample has up to 8.6 wt.-% Zn.
4.8. Geophysics 每 seismic results
To assess the dimension, structure and lithology of the deep interior
of the eSMS mounds, coincident geophysical lines were occupied including active seismic studies. Here, we focus on the result of one of the
shorter, 5 km-long (NW-SE) seismic lines shot using GI-guns over both
Shinkai and Southern mounds, with re?ections and refractions recorded
on a number of ocean bottom seismometers placed on and around the
mounds (see Fig. 2A for the orientation of the line and locations of the
OBS＊s discussed here). Fig. 13 shows examples of processed arrivals (see
Methods for details) from record sections from four OBS sensors (OBS-
01, 04, 08, 09) located along the Line 1 (the NW-SE profle line (white
dashed-line in Fig. 2A). The record sections show similar basement and
intracrustal re?ections (PbP and PmP), from within the altered upper
oceanic crust and from the within the unaltered oceanic crust, respectively, which informs us of the geometry and thickness of each layer. In
addition, a crustal refraction (Pb) yields information about the velocity
of the deeper layers. OBS-04 and OBS-08 (located on the crest of the
mounds) have an additional re?ection horizon (PeP), which corresponds to a P-to-P re?ection from immediately beneath the eSMS
mounds.
OBS sensors located on top of the mounds reveal a P-wave velocity
model, derived using the iterative method to best ft the observed arrivals (described in the Methods section above) for the eSMS mounds
and their sub-sea?oor geometry (Fig. 14 and inset detailed panels). The
deeper structure was obtained from 10 km-long G-gun profles. The
shallow structure reveals a ‵350 m wide, 150每210 m thick downward
narrowing cone, with inward-dipping boundaries between relatively
higher and lower velocities that we interpret as corresponding to the
mineralised zone and altered basaltic host, respectively. Our travel-time
inversion indicates the average P-wave velocity within the high-velocity sub-sea?oor mineralised zone beneath the mounds is c.
5.0 ㊣ 0.4 km/s. Additional, very shallow PeP arrivals from within that
zone (Fig. 13B,C) suggest a potential 2-layer architecture, composed of
a higher velocity (4.2每6.6, average 5.4 km/s), 50每100 m thick upperlayer (zone 1) and lower velocity (4每5.5 average, 4.75 km/s), ‵100 m
thick deeper root (zone 2). This transitions into a lower velocity
(3.65 km/s) material (zone 3), which we interpreted as the host rock.
Outside the eSMS mounds, the crustal structure appears as two
distinct layers forming a 2每2.5 km thick section with upper crustal velocities of 3.5每4.7 km/s (See refraction Pb, Fig. 13A,C,D) and a lower
crustal velocity of 5.7 to 7.2 km/s (Fig. 14). The upper crustal layer
thins towards the southeast where it is separated from the lower crustal
section by a marked velocity change with the higher velocities (7.0 km/
s) almost emerging at the sea?oor.
In summary, the seismic data yield signifcant details about the
geometry of the eSMS mounds and their associated velocity, and hence
lithological, structure at depth. Both Southern and Shinkai mounds
have a similar high velocity, cone-shaped body that narrows
downwards, host within a lower velocity surrounding basement.
Shinkai mound has a maximum height of 65 m, a basal radius of 130 m,
a maximum depth for zone 1 of 80 mbsf ㊣ 10% and a maximum depth
for zone 2 of 220 mbsf ㊣ 10%,. Southern mound has a maximum
height of 55 m, a basal radius of 160 m, a maximum depth for zone 1 of
150 mbsf ㊣ 10%, and a maximum depth for zone 2 of 270 mbsf ㊣
10%. The ratio between mound radius, zone 1 and zone 2 maximum
depths for both these examples is ‵0.61 and 1.4每1.7, respectively.

Discussion
5.1. Towards a generic model for eSMS deposits at a slow spreading ridge
Combining the surface geology information and drill core with the
geophysical data from across the TAG hydrothermal feld allows us to
construct a composite model for the structure of the eSMS mounds
(Fig. 15A). The three eSMS mounds have many similarities; they are
draped in a veil of pelagic sediment, underlain by 1每3 m of barren, ironoxide/oxyhydroxide-rich sediments, with intercalated thin layers of
manganese oxyhydroxide. The iron-oxide/oxyhydroxide-rich sediments
have low base metal content, but appear to be derived from weathering
of hydrothermal sulphides from the summits of the mounds (e.g.
chimneys), which have been variably altered through interaction with
seawater. Sediments at the base of, and distal from, the mounds are
composed of sulphide sands and iron oxides, and often have a fning
upwards sequence, typical for turbidite deposits resulting from mass
wasting of the eSMS mounds. The preservation of higher Cu contents,
and pyrite, chalcopyrite and sphalerite grains indicates that seawater
penetration is restricted in these sediments, possibly due to their rapid
burial, lower permeability, and the absence of residual hydrothermal
?ow. Pelagic layers, intercalated with the metalliferous sediments, record hiatuses in the hydrothermal activity. The Mn-rich horizons on
and within the pelagic sediments are likely derived from hydrothermal
plume fall-out, while those within the shallow metalliferous sediment
sequence, and their elevated copper concentrations, are probably the
result of precipitation at a radox front. Tilting of some of the sediments,
with dip decreasing up section, indicates syn-depositionary deformation, probably in response to rotation of the basement by faulting in the
TAG hydrothermal feld. Together, these metalliferous sediments may
present a resource potential in their own right, with a mixture of Cuand Zn-rich material dispersed over an area of several square kilometres, and deserve further investigation.
The formation of a ubiquitous and 2.5每3.5 m thick layer of jasper at
the top of the eSMS mounds, below the sediments, is unusual and has
not previously been reported from hydrothermally active SMS systems.
However, the jasper material has many textural similarities to minor
occurrences at modern hydrothermal vent sites, including the flamentous and sponge-like micro-textures that are possibly the result of
bacterial involvement (Juniper and Fouquet, 1988; Hannington and
Jonasson, 1992; Duhig et al., 1992; Little et al., 1999; Hofmann and
Farmer, 2000; Trewin and Knoll, 2000). The presence of overgrowths of
sulphides in the jasper, often comprising euhedral pyrite and minor
chalcopyrite, combined with the change in colour from dark red to a
lighter shade of red, with bleached mottled areas towards the base of
the layer, associated with a change from hematite to goethite, indicate
the infusion of late-stage, chemically reduced, sulphidic ?uids. It is
thought that jasper formation is a result of silica precipitation from lowtemperature, di?use hydrothermal venting that has resulted in silicifcation of pre-existing iron-rich sediments (Alt, 1988; Sto?ers et al.,
1993). This implies that the formation of the thick jasper layers at the
TAG eSMS sites is a result of late stage, low-temperature, hydrothermal
?uid ?ow, focused on the summits of the waning hydrothermal systems.
The thickness and relative impermeability of the jasper layer is also
signifcant. The rapid transition into fresh, unoxidised pyrite and
chalcopyrite (and copper-rich) massive sulphides immediately below
the jasper layer suggests it acts as an impermeable barrier to the ingress
of seawater. The jasper layer bears some resemblance to occurrences of
silica encountered below the active TAG mound, in stockwork breccia
at depth (Fig. 15B; Humphris et al., 1995). It is also similar to the siliceous layer found above a copper-rich zone, deep within the sedimenthosted Bent Hill deposit (Fig. 15C; Zierenberg et al., 1998). The IRINA
II Mound at the ultramafc-hosted Logatchev vent site (Fig. 15D) also
has a silicifed sulphide breccia cap, although the interior of the deposit
is heterogeneous with sulphide formation restricted to the immediate
vicinity of the active vent sites and the majority of the mound＊s interior
being composed of altered, chloritised and serpentinised ultramafc
lithologies (Augustin, 2007; Petersen et al., 2009). Similar jasper materials are found elsewhere, in the geological record. For example, in
the Iberian Pyrite Belt they are considered vectors to massive sulphide
ore deposits, especially when the jasper is altered into grey chert containing pyrite and chlorite, which grow at the expense of hematite,
attesting to the contribution of reduced ?uids at elevated temperatures
(Barriga and Kerrich, 1984; Barriga and Fyfe, 1988; Carvalho et al.,
1999).
At Southern and Rona mounds, the japers transition in to a weakly
mineralised zone of silicifed breccia. The brecciation is interpreted to
result from volume reduction and collapse, possibly related to anhydrite dissolution at depth. Below the breccia, the deposits are composed
of low-porosity, massive sulphide with little or no gangue material. The
upper 3每6 m of the massive sulphides contains minor amounts of barite,
indicating interaction with seawater at temperatures up to ‵250 ∼C
(Jamieson et al., 2016). At Rona mound, a shallower zinc-rich zone also
occurs (at 7.4每9 mbsf). Copper concentrations generally increase with
depth where primary pyrite is overgrown, and cut by, chalcopyrite
veins, interpreted as evidence for later mobilisation and recrystallisation of copper at elevated temperatures above 300 ∼C. This is probably a
result of high-temperature hydrothermal ?uids mobilizing copper upwards as the mounds grow, similar to that proposed for the active TAG
mound (Humphris et al., 1995). Whether higher grades of copper
continue below 12.5 mbsf, or are restricted to the depths encountered
here, remains unknown.
In contrast to the active TAG mound (Humphris et al., 1995), where
anhydrite dominates the interior, anhydrite is not present in any of the
eSMS cores. This is expected for hydrothermally extinct deposits where
the retrograde solubility of anhydrite at temperatures below 140 ∼C
(Blount and Dickson, 1969) causes it to dissolve once hydrothermal
?uids cease circulating. The inward dipping, arcuate faults that dissect
the oldest and largest eSMS mounds (e.g. Southern, Rona and Double
mounds) are unusual in that they curve around the mounds, have a low
angle (20每30∼), and form graben structures centred on the summits of
the mounds. We interpret their presence as the result of volume reduction and collapse within the mounds caused by anhydrite dissolution, 
and is probably a common phenomenon in the older eSMS deposits where interior temperatures have fallen below 140 ∼C 
(Humphriset al., 1995; Petersen et al., 2000). Shinkai Mound and the New
Mounds, which have little pelagic sediment cover and host many
standing but inactive chimneys, do not show these features, and we
speculate volume reduction within these younger mounds has not
commenced due to higher temperatures maintaining the stability of
anhydrite. The signifcance of the curved faults is in terms of the potential for seawater ingress and alteration of the sulphide at depth. As
we did not drill on the ?anks of the mounds, this possibility remains
untested.
5.2. Estimates of the mass of the sulphide resource
The combined geological and seismic data for each of the eSMS
mounds indicate the deposits extend to depths of up to ‵200 mbsf
where they comprise a layered structure with higher velocity layers
(zones 1 and 2) embedded in a lower velocity host (zone 3). The following description is based on Southern and Shinkai mounds: Zone 1
has rapidly increasing seismic velocity with an average of 5.4 km/s that
extends to ‵100 mbsf and is consistent with the presence of a mainly
sulphide-rich ore body of the type intersected by our drilling. Zone 2
also has a moderately high average velocity, of 4.75 ㊣ 0.3 km/s, and
extends to ‵200 mbsf. We interpret it as a ＆stockwork＊ composed of a
mixture of lithologies potentially including altered basalt, silica and
sulphide (e.g. similar to the TAG active mound stockwork). Zone 3 has a
lower average velocity of 3.65 ㊣ 0.2 km/s and is consistent with an
altered and brecciated basaltic host.
We can estimate the proportion of lithologies forming the di?erent
zones identifed from the seismic model by assuming a mixture of pure
end-member lithologies, (sediment, sulphide (pyrite), jasper (silica) and
chloritised altered basalt) using their seismic velocities measured on
core material recovered from the SMS (Table 5). For example, the
proportion of massive sulphide (XS) in zone 1, can be estimated as:
X (V V )/(V V ) S 1 Z S Z = (1)
where: XS = proportion of massive sulphide; VS = P-wave velocity of
massive sulphide (6.1 km/s); VZ = average P-wave velocity of nonsulphide phase; V1 = average P-wave velocity of zone 1 (5.4 km/s)
Although we do not know the actual composition of zone 1, we can
estimate the maximum and minimum proportions of sulphide by assuming the non-sulphide component is either the highest velocity (silica) or lowest velocity (water-flled pore space) material encountered
during the drilling. This assumption yields an envelope for the upper
and lower estimates of the sulphide present, respectively.
Assuming the non-sulphide in zone 1 is silica (i.e. 4.5 km/s), then
the estimated proportion of sulphide is 56%. Alternatively, assuming
the non-sulphide is pore-water flled porosity, (i.e. 1.5 km/s) then the
proportion of sulphide is 85%. Alternatively, assuming the non-sulphide is altered basalt, (i.e. 3.47 km/s), which we did not encounter in
the drilling but that surrounds the eSMS mounds, then the proportion of
sulphide is 73% (Table 6). Hence in zone 1, the proportion of massive
sulphide may vary between 56 and 85% by volume. The drill core indicates that silica, in the form of jasper, occurs as a 3每5 m-thick layer at
the top of the massive sulphide and then decreases rapidly where it
appears to be absent 3 m below the base of the jasper layer, whereas
open pore space remains present. In addition, and in contrast to the
active TAG mound, there was an absence of anhydrite in the drill core
(i.e. having already dissolved), meaning the non-sulphide component is
most likely to represent water-flled porosity in a brecciated massive
sulphide layer. Hence the proportion of massive sulphide in zone 1 is
likely skewed towards the higher-end of the estimated range.
Repeating this for zone 2 (with an average P-wave velocity,
V3 = 4.75 km/s), and assuming options for the non-sulphide as either
(a) silica, (b) pore water, and/or (c) altered basalt, yields the following
proportions of sulphide: (a) 16%, (b) 71%, (c) 49%, respectively
(Table 6). Using all three non-sulphide options yield signifcantly less
sulphide than in zone 1. Porosity in zone 2 might be assumed to be
closer to zero, because it is greater that 100 mbsf, making the upper
estimate of the amount of sulphide unrealistic. Instead, the concentration of sulphide is likely to be closer to the lower estimate of 16%, given
that a silicifed stockwork containing up to 46% pyrite was encountered
during drilling beneath the TAG active mound (Humphris et al., 1995).
While our calculations suggest this could be achieved for our eSMS
deposits assuming a 1:1 mixture of altered basalt and silica as the nonsulphide matrix to a sulphide breccia, it is also possible to reproduce the
average velocity in zone 2 from a barren mixture of 26% silica and 74%
altered basalt (i.e. no sulphide).
While our new data do not permit predictions about the chemical
composition, or metal tenor, of the interior of the mounds at depths
greater than 12.5 mbsf, the model does predict the total mass of sulphide in the eSMS mounds in the TAG hydrothermal feld (excluding
MIR Zone and Shimmering Mound).
The volume of zone 1 comprises the volume of the eSMS mound
(calculated from its bathymetric expression above the surrounding
sea?oor) plus the volume of an inverted cone that extends below the
base of the mound. Similarly, for zone 2 we can calculate its volume as
an inverted cone extending below the base of the mound, minus the
volume of zone 1 that lies below the base of the mound. Applying the
same geometry to the other eSMS mounds in the area, we can also make
an estimate of the total mass of sulphide in the ore body and stockwork
(Table 7).
Zone 1 for Shinkai Mound has an estimated volume of 1.2 million
cubic metres, including the topographic expression of the mound itself,
and for Southern Mound it is 2.4 million cubic metres. Zone 2 for
Shinkai Mound has an estimated volume of 2.5 million cubic metres
and for Southern Mound it is 3.2 million cubic metres. Assuming the
lower limit for sulphide contents, based on the minimum P-wave velocities and thickness of the zones, and a density of pure sulphide of
5 g/cc, then we estimate the total mass of sulphide for zone 1 (56%) in
and below Shinkai Mound of 3.1 Mt, and for Southern Mound of 9.4 Mt.
This assumes the sulphide in zone 1 is in the form of a silicifed breccia,
similar to that encountered during the TAG active mound drilling
(Humphris et al., 1995). Zone 2 is devoid of any sulphide, if we assume
it is and composed of silicifed altered basalt. Assuming the upper limit
for sulphide content (85%), based on the maximum P-wave velocities
and thicknesses of the zones in and below the mounds, yields an estimated sulphide mass for zone 1 of 5.9 Mt for Shinkai Mound and
17.7 Mt for Southern Mound. Zone 2 has a maximum sulphide content
of 71%, which yields corresponding masses of sulphide of 9.7 Mt and
12.6 Mt for Shinkai and Southern mounds, respectively. In this scenario,
zone 1 and 2 would be composed of massive sulphide breccia with open
pore space, and zone 2 having a larger proportion of void space than
zone 1, which is unlikely given its depth below the sea?oor.
We propose a more realistic scenario for the mass of sulphide, based
on a mean value for the seismically determined P-wave velocities and
thicknesses of the zones, our shallow drilling results and drawing a
comparison with lithologies encountered during the full penetration
during drilling of the active TAG mound (Humphris et al., 1995). In this
scenario, we assume zone 1 is composed of brecciated massive sulphide
with open pore space at the top (as encountered by our drilling), with
an increase in silica flling the open pore space with depth (as encountered by the active TAG mound drilling 每 Humphris et al., 1995)
but with anhydrite being absent. This yields an average proportion of
sulphide in zone 1 of 70%, corresponding to a mass of 3.2 Mt and
10.5 Mt in Shinkai and Southern mounds, respectively. Zone 2 we assume is composed entirely of a silicifed breccia and disseminated sulphide forming a stockwork (as encountered by the TAG drilling 每
Humphris et al., 1995), but with an average proportion of sulphide of
only 16% (compared with 46% beneath the active TAG mound)
yielding 2.0 Mt and 2.6 Mt of sulphide in zone 2 at Shinkai and
Southern mounds, respectively. Together, zones 1 and 2 yield a total
mass of sulphide at Shinkai and Southern mounds of 6.3 Mt and
15.8 Mt. This is approximately 3 times greater than the mass of sulphide
calculated from the topographic expression of the eSMS mounds alone
(Table 7 and Fig. 16). It also indicates that mounds with a radius of
50 m or less are likely to represent deposits of < 1 Mt.
Extrapolating these results to the other eSMS mounds studied in the
TAG area, our estimates yield a range in total tonnage of sulphide in
and below the mounds of between 14 Mt and 54 Mt. Our preferred estimate, based on the assumptions above, yields a total tonnage of 26 Mt.
While these estimates are considerably larger than previous estimates
for the TAG massive sulphide deposits, we stress that there remains an
absence of information about the metal grades below 12.5 mbsf at the
eSMS deposits we have studied. It remains possible that the subsurface
sulphides are barren pyrite, and as such their resource potential is
minimal.

Conclusions
Sea?oor massive sulphides provide a modern analogue of volcanic
massive sulphide deposits found throughout the geological record. They
also have the potential to be a resource for base metals, especially
copper, zinc and precious metals such as gold and silver. This paper
brings together four years of data collection including survey design,
instrument development, deployment across 10 weeks of ship time, and
deep-sea?oor drilling. The geological and geophysical data and their
interpretation described here form, to date, the most detailed, threedimensional characterisation of hydrothermally extinct, sea?oor massive sulphide deposits, hosted by volcanic systems, at a slow spreading
mid-ocean ridge. This research clearly demonstrates a distinct difference between the structure and composition of hydrothermally active
SMS deposits on slow spreading ridges, and hydrothermally extinct
eSMS systems. The main differences are found in the change from active
SMS deposits, where anhydrite dominates an interior comprising massive sulphide overlying a silicifed altered basalt-hosted sulphide
stockwork (Humphris et al., 1995), compared with the eSMS deposits
that have a 1每5 m thick carapace of iron-rich oxide sediments overlying
a 3每6 m thick impermeable silica cap that in turn overlies a dense
massive sulphide ore body of about 100 m thickness, that overlays a
moderate density silicifed sulphide stockwork zone, surrounded by
lower density host rocks of altered basalt. Our combined geological and
geophysics data show that the main ore body is composed of brecciated
and partially silicifed sulphide that extends to a sub-sea?oor depth of
about 100 m with an average sulphide content of about 70% that increases with depth. The underlying stockwork extends to another 100 m
depth and likely comprises ‵16% sulphide in a silicifed matrix that
grades into an altered basalt host rock. These data indicate a resource
that is 2 to 5 times larger than that predicted from the surface expression of the deposits alone. This estimate is even larger if the metal
rich sediment-aprons that surround the eSMS mounds are included.
Our results also give insights into the processes leading to the formation of the eSMS deposits, and especially those that occur at the
closing stages of the hydrothermal cycle. High-resolution AUV-bathymetry (0.5 m resolution) and RUV HyBIS surveys show that the eSMS
mounds have partially collapsed, probably due to anhydrite dissolution
and the resulting volumetric contraction within the main ore body. The
upper ore body is protected from seawater penetration by late stage,
low-temperature hydrothermal silicifcation of iron-rich hydrothermal
sediments, generating a silica cap. Remobilisation and recrystallisation
of the massive sulphide, especially the copper-rich phases such as
chalcopyrite, have led to an enrichment in the upper ten metres of the
ore body, but the impact on metal tenor at depth remains unknown.
The implication of this work is a signifcant upward revision of the
sulphide volume for eSMS deposits at slow-spreading ridges. Whereas a
global database of SMS deposits indicates the majority are relatively
small (Hannington et al., 2011), this study indicates that many of these
are actually larger and extend sub-sea?oor. Depending on their, as yet
undetermined, metal tenor at depth, these deposits may represent more
economically attractive targets than their resource estimates, based on
the volume of the mound alone, would suggest.
