River piracy—the diversion of the headwaters of one stream into another one—can dramatically change the routing of water
and sediment, with a profound eect on landscape evolution. Stream piracy has been investigated in glacial environments,
but so far it has mainly been studied over Quaternary or longer timescales. Here we document how retreat of Kaskawulsh
Glacier—one of Canada’s largest glaciers—abruptly and radically altered the regional drainage pattern in spring 2016.We use
a combination of hydrological measurements and drone-generated digital elevation models to show that in late May 2016,
meltwater from the glacier was re-routed from discharge in a northward direction into the Bering Sea, to southward into
the Pacific Ocean. Based on satellite image analysis and a signal-to-noise ratio as a metric of glacier retreat, we conclude
that this instance of river piracy was due to post-industrial climate change. Rapid regional drainage reorganizations of this
type can have profound downstream impacts on ecosystems, sediment and carbon budgets, and downstream communities
that rely on a stable and sustained discharge. We suggest that the planforms of Slims and Kaskawulsh rivers will adjust
in response to altered flows, and the future Kaskawulsh watershed will extend into the now-abandoned headwaters of
Slims River and eventually capture the Kluane Lake drainage.
River piracy, the diversion of the headwaters of one stream
into another with a higher gradient1, can alter the location
of a drainage divide and dramatically change the routing
of water and sediment, with a profound eect on landscape
evolution24. Although some researchers have examined stream
piracy in glacial environments57, relatively little attention has been
given to proglacial drainage changes. Furthermore, previous studies
of river piracy have dealt with capture over Quaternary or longer
timescales, with no one, to our knowledge, having detailed the
phenomenon in the modern era. Herein, we document rapid river
piracy at the front of Kaskawulsh Glacier, Yukon (Fig. 1), which
occurred in May 2016.
The toe of Kaskawulsh Glacier lies at a drainage divide that
separates the Alsek River watershed, which drains to the North
Pacific Ocean, from the Yukon River watershed, which drains to
the Bering Sea. Prior to May 2016, some of the water flowing
from the toe of the glacier marked the headwaters of Kaskawulsh
River, a major tributary of Alsek River. The remainder of the water
issuing from the glacier flowed via Slims River into Kluane Lake,
the largest lake in Yukon and part of the Yukon River watershed.
Ongoing thinning and retreat of the glacier, caused by over a
century of climate warming812, triggered the river piracy, which was
geologically instantaneous and is likely to be permanent. Substantial
long-term hydrological and ecological impacts13,14 may be expected
as a result, including a reversal in outflow from Kluane Lake,
diminished outflow at the north end of the lake, and perhaps even
seasonal closure of the lake basin.
Recent history of Kaskawulsh Glacier and its terminal lakes
In the early Holocene, when the climate of southwest Yukon was
warmer than today, Kluane Lake discharged to the south towards
the Alsek River15. Kaskawulsh Glacier achieved itsmaximum extent
between 1717 and the mid-1750s1618. During this Little Ice Age
advance, sediment fromthe glacier deposited an outwash fan, which
raised the base level of a river that formerly drained south from
Kluane Lake (Fig. 1), perhaps through much of the Holocene19. By
the middle of the eighteenth century, the glacier completely blocked
this south-flowing river, initiating the north-flowing Slims River,
which rapidly built a delta and floodplain intoKluane Lake. The lake
rose about 12m above the 2006 datum and flowed over a debris fan
at the north end of the lake, rapidly returning the lake to its present
level15,19. Kaskawulsh Glacier began to retreat in the nineteenth
century, with retreat accelerating in the late twentieth and early
twenty-first centuries. Between 1956 and 2007, for example, the
glacier retreated 655m (ref. 9). Roe et al.12 recently developed
a method to test a glacier's retreat against the null hypothesis
that retreat was due to natural climate variability. Applying this
analysis to theKaskawulshGlacier (seeMethods and Supplementary
Fig. 1), we find there is only a 0.5% chance that retreat over the
past centuryand by extension, the observed piracycould have
happened under a constant climate. We therefore conclude that
retreat of Kaskawulsh Glacier is attributable to observed warming
over the industrial era.
Recent retreat of Kaskawulsh Glacier has been accompanied
by the growth of terminal lakes, the largest of which we name`Slims Lake' and `Kaskawulsh Lake' (Fig. 2). Outflow from Slims
Lake has historically been northward into Kluane Lake via Slims
River, whereas outflow from Kaskawulsh Lake has historically been
southward to Alsek River via Kaskawulsh River (Fig. 1). A 1956
aerial photograph9 shows a small Slims Lake on the west side of the
glacier terminus. Only isolated ponds are visible in 1972 and 1980,
with no lake at all in 1990 (Fig. 2). However, by 2000, Slims Lake
had grown to 1.1106 m2, and by 2015 its area had increased more
than threefold to 3.9106 m2 (Fig. 2b,h). ByAugust 2016 (Fig. 2b,i),
Slims Lake had partially drained, its area decreasing to 1.0106 m2,
stranding the outlet of Slims River 17m above the level of the
remnant water body.
The earliest Landsat scene (2 September 1972) shows a small
(1.1106 m2) Kaskawulsh Lake at the east margin of the glacier
terminus (Fig. 2). The lake expanded to1.9106 m2 by 2010, and
to2.7106 m2 by 2015. By early July 2016, its size was three times
that in 1982 (3.3106 m2).
Drainage reorganization in 2016
Although the Slims River gauge record has gaps (Fig. 3g), a clear
reduction in river level is apparent in May 2016. Normal diurnal
fluctuations ended with an abrupt four-day drop in river level
commencing on 26 May 2016. Over the remainder of the summer
of 2016, the level of Slims River was 0.71.0m below the average for
those days. Our acoustic Doppler current profiler measurements at
the Slims River bridge on 3 September 2016, indicated a discharge of
11m3 s􀀀1, less than that reported following the 1970 (21m3 s􀀀1)
diversion. Although we have no measurements immediately prior
to the 2016 piracy, pre-diversion flows of 130m3 s􀀀1 have been
reported for 197020.
The reduction of Slims River flow has had substantial eects at
Kluane Lake. The lake had a record minimum water level in early
May 2016 (Fig. 3ac), about 0.1mbelow its previously recorded low
inMay 2015. By the time of its normal seasonal peak (early August),
the lake was 1.7m below its long-term mean level and 1m below
its lowest recorded level for that time of year. The lowering ofKluane
Lake in 2016 equates to a volumetric reduction of0.67 km3 relative
to the historic average.
Alsek River discharge (Fig. 3df) fluctuated around the historic
mean until early July 2016, after which it rose sharply and fluctuated
around the historic maximum level for that time of year, at times
exceeding it by 1 m. The peak discharge in 2016 occurred on
20 July (1,470m3 s􀀀1), which is nearly as high as any previously
recorded peak flow (1,550m3 s􀀀1, 13 July, 1989) and 87% higher
than the average peak discharge during the 41-yr period of record
(783m3 s􀀀1). The elevated discharge was probably the result of
the emptying of the eastern part of Slims Lake and lowering of
its western part, with the consequent re-routing of water from
Slims River into Kaskawulsh River. By October 2016, Alsek River
discharge had dropped to its historic mean, reflecting the reduction
in discharge from glacier melt at the end of the summer.
About 15mm of rain fell at Haines Junction on 2 May 2016,
but there was little other precipitation during the first half of
2016 (Supplementary Fig. 2). It is therefore unlikely that rainfall
contributed significantly to the mid-summer increase inAlsek River
discharge. Meteorological records from Haines Junction and the
Kaskawulsh Glacier nunatak indicate that mean daily temperatures
during the period JanuaryApril 2016 were, respectively, 4.3 C
and 3.6 C warmer than the 20072016 decadal means for the
same three-month period (Supplementary Fig. 2), which itself was
probably the warmest decade of the past century21. At Haines
Junction,which is 300mlower than the glacier terminus,mean daily
temperatures were above freezing almost continuously after mid-
March, approximately one month earlier than the decadal mean.
At the nunatak, which is 1,000m higher than the terminus, the
main period of above-freezing conditions started in early May,
1.5 weeks earlier than normal, and air temperatures were
unusually warm immediately before the drop in the level of Slims
River (Supplementary Fig. 2). It thus seems likely that Kaskawulsh
Glacier experienced unusually high surface melt in the spring of
2016, which lead to development of an ice-walled canyon (Fig. 4
and Supplementary Fig. 3) and increased flow in Kaskawulsh and
Alsek rivers.
The ice-walled channel that was established across dead ice at the
terminus of Kaskawulsh Glacier (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Fig. 3)
was rapidly enlarged by meltwater and localized collapse of the
channel walls in the summer of 2016, resulting in the 17mlowering
of Slims Lake. Even if the current canyon walls were to collapse and
temporarily block the flow of meltwater into Kaskawulsh Lake, the
blockage could not pond water in Slims Lake to the level required
to re-establish Slims River. For example, at transect AA0 near the
upstream end of the canyon (Fig. 4), the channel floor is at785m
a.s.l. For an ice blockage to raise water levels to reconnect to Slims
River (head at 805m a.s.l.), Slims Lake would need to be >20m
deep, which is more than the height of the canyon walls (Fig. 4b).
Only a re-advance of Kaskawulsh Glacier could block the channel
and refill Slims Lake, but this is very unlikely given recent and
current climate trends. We therefore conclude that the drainage
change is permanent.
Previous workers19 had predicted the capture of Slims River by
Kaskawulsh River, although they were unable to predict when, or
how rapidly, that change might happen. These predictions were
based, in part, on the fact that Kaskawulsh River has amuch steeper
gradient than Slims Riverthe uppermost reach of Kaskawulsh
River has a gradient of 6.1mkm􀀀1, almost five times that of
upper Slims River (1.3mkm􀀀1, Fig. 5). Furthermore, the surface
of Kaskawulsh Lake is approximately 50m lower than that of
Slims Lake (755m versus 805m a.s.l. in September 2016), and also
approximately 25m lower than that of Kluane Lake (780m a.s.l.
in September 2016).
Implications of drainage reorganization
The piracy of Slims River has five important downstream
implications. First, the level of Kluane Lake has fallen and may
fall further, potentially below its outlet at the north end of the
lake (Fig. 1). If this happens, Kluane Lake will become a closed
basin. Second, the large supply of sediment to Kluane Lake from
Slims River2224 has ended, with unknown eects on the structure
and chemistry of the lake and its ecosystems25. For example, in
summer 2016,massive afternoon dust storms occurred almost daily
on the nearly abandoned Slims River floodplain (Supplementary
Fig. 3) due to the lower lake level, possibly altering nutrient fluxes
to the lake. Third, Slims, Kaskawulsh and Alsek rivers must now
all adjust to altered discharges. For example, as flow and sediment
transport in Slims River have decreased greatly, channel stability
there may increase, resulting in conversion from a braided to a
wandering or meandering river planform26. Increased flows in
Kaskawulsh River may increase sediment conveyance and bank
erosion. Fourth, large-scale changes to drainage basin geometry
and re-routing of meltwater may introduce considerable changes
to fish populations and habitat, including eects produced by
the timing of flows27. Fifth, assuming that Kaskawulsh Glacier
continues to thin and recede, Kaskawulsh River may advance its
drainage headward (northward) into the easily erodible Slims River
valley fill and towards Kluane Lake, thereby capturing the discharge
of the small mountain streams that previously joined Slims River. It
is noteworthy that the present head of Kaskawulsh River is 25m
below the current level of Kluane Lake and, as a consequence,
there is gravitational potential to drive continued expansion of
the Kaskawulsh River catchment towards the lake (Fig. 5). Thus,
over time, headward erosion could result in Kaskawulsh River
reaching the south end of Kluane Lake and re-establishing its
former southerly drainage to the Pacific Ocean15,19.
These eects highlight the consequences of climate-induced
glacier retreat, and river piracy triggered by such retreat, on the
routing of water and sediment across a deglaciating landscape. Such
changes undoubtedly were common, and probably occurred on a
larger scale, during the decay of ice sheets in North America and
Eurasia at the close of the Pleistocene, as shown by abandoned
and buried valleys that are common features of formerly glaciated
landscapes.We contend that radical reorganizations of drainage can
occur in a geologic instant, although they may also be driven by
longer-term climate change. The potential consequences of such
channel re-routing and environmental change are amplified by
anthropogenic activity and settlement, and these eects can be
expected to have significant eects on both ecosystem functioning
and economic infrastructure, for example hydroelectric power
generation and water supply, as glacier retreat proceeds in a
future warming climate. Most studies of the eects of climate
change on glacial environments deal with enhanced melt or contri-
butions to sea-level rise. We suggest that the eects can be more
far reaching.