The inuence of edge undulation on vortex
formation for low-aspect-ratio propulsors
Experiments to study the effect of edge undulation on vortex formation have been
conducted on impulsively accelerated plates. Abstractions of propulsors found in
nature are produced by imprinting undulatory features with varying wavelengths
onto the circumferential vortex-forming edge of circular plates. The effects of the
small-scale disturbances introduced by these modifications are accessed by means of
force measurements and time-resolved particle image velocimetry. Investigations of
four different geometries at two different Reynolds numbers reveal an insensitivity
of the flow towards length scales smaller than or similar to the thickness of the
feeding shear layer. However, the instabilities in the shear layer and the coherence of
the vortex wake are influenced when the wavelength of the undulation exceeds the
shear-layer thickness by a significant margin. This results in a force augmentation due
to enhanced entrainment into the turbulent vortex core, and thus an associated faster
vortex growth rate. Yet, contrary to prior expectations, the time of vortex pinch-off
remains constant for all edge modifications. The cause–effect relationship behind the
stability of the vortex wake is further investigated. While for small edge undulations
a turbulent transition of the vortex core results in vortex pinch-off, for larger edge
undulations the turbulent vortex core is found to be fed constantly with additional
circulation from the shear layer.
Key words: propulsion, free shear layers, mixing enhancement
1. Introduction
Thy dynamics of swimming and flying differ significantly between the observable
behaviour in nature and engineering solutions. Flow separation in quasi-steady
flows (e.g. on fixed wings and rigid bodies) usually leads to significant losses of
propulsive efficiency and control authority, and hence is generally avoided in most
engineering applications. In contrast, during a propulsive stroke in nature, animals
utilise accelerating and morphing propulsors to actively trigger flow separation, as
sketched in figure 1. At the vortex-forming edge (VFE; marked green in figure 1),
a shear layer separates from the propulsor. Subsequently, the shear layer rolls up
FIGURE 1. Undulatory modifications of the VFE (depicted in green): (a) leopard frog
(sketch abstracted from Johansson & Lauder (2004)); (b) sea lion (sketch abstracted from
Sawyer, Turner & Kaas (2016)); and (c) humpback whale (sketch abstracted from Fish &
Lauder (2006)).
to form a vortical structure. Fluid–structure interaction between the vortex and the
propulsor leads to the production of lift and thrust, while maintaining manoeuvrability.
Comprehensive overviews of animal locomotion are given by Azuma (2006), Shyy
et al. (2007) and Biewener & Patek (2018) to name but a few.
According to Pitt Ford & Babinsky (2013), the importance of the unsteady vortex
to lift and thrust is defined by its circulation, as the vortex contains most of the
circulation bound to the propulsor. However, when the vortex sheds, the associated
forces are reduced significantly. As a consequence, the influencing factors on the
circulation of the vortex wake and its stability have been widely addressed in
recent studies. Examples include the role of rotational accelerations (see e.g. Lentink
& Dickinson 2009), propulsor flexibility (see e.g. Vanella et al. 2009), spanwise
curvature (see e.g. Taira & Colonius (2009), Hartloper & Rival (2013)), swept wings
(see e.g. Wong & Rival (2015)) and the interaction of the vortex with secondary
boundary layers (Eslam Panah, Akkala & Buchholz 2015; Akkala & Buchholz 2017).
This study aims to extend the above studies towards a characterisation of the
effects of small-scale structures in unsteady flows, and their relevance towards the
resulting vortex dynamics. In particular, we strive to draw insight into the influence
of turbulence and associated coherent flow structures of different length scales on
the vortex formation process. Inspired by undulated modifications on the VFE of
multiple propulsors in nature (see figure 1), this problem is tackled with a combined
study of vortex formation over a wide range of Re superimposed with various VFE
modifications. While an increase of Re is known to extend the range of turbulent
substructures towards additional smaller vortices, VFE modifications allow for the
introduction of disturbances with distinct wavelengths , which are predetermined by
the propulsor itself.
1.1. Background on the Re scaling of vortex formation and shear layers
Various swimmers and flyers across diverse species utilise separated flows during
their locomotion. Inspired by this evolutionary convergence, prior studies applied
dimensional analysis to extract commonalities in shape and kinematics for a large
variety of propulsors. These common shapes and kinematics developed independently
and from different lineages. For instance, Chin & Lentink (2016), among others,
characterised leading-edge vortices (LEVs) through dimensionless quantities such as
Rossby number (Ro), Strouhal number (St) and Reynolds number (Re). In particular,
Ro, i.e. the relation between centripetal and Coriolis forcing due to rotational
accelerations of the wing, was emphasised as crucial for long-term LEV stability.
Furthermore, Lentink & Dickinson (2009) revealed a limit to values of Ro < 4 in
nature across diverse species.
Plunging and pitching kinematics are characterised by the reduced frequency (k)
and the Strouhal number. Again, a narrow band of values 0:2 6 St 6 0:4 tends to
deliver maximum efficiency and can be found for both flyers (Taylor, Nudds &
Thomas 2003) and swimmers (Triantafyllou, Triantafyllou & Gopalkrishnan 1991). In
contrast, propulsors ranging from fruit flies to large cetaceans use vortical structures
for efficient propagation, which according to Gazzola, Argentina & Mahadevan
(2014) corresponds to a rather large Reynolds-number range of 102 6 Re 6 108. The
convergence over a wide range of Re found in nature suggests a small influence of the
small-scale structures in the flow onto the vortex formation process and the associated
loadings. The above result that small scales do not influence vortex formation is
unexpected since various studies indicate a Re-dependent formation of separated shear
layers. The review on quasi-steady shear layers by Ho & Huerre (1984) indicates
an essentially inviscid mechanism behind the dominant instability mechanism in free
shear layers: Kelvin–Helmholtz instability (KHI). However, small-scale mixing and
entrainment are still dominated by viscous effects, as discussed by Wolf et al. (2013)
and Chauhan, Philip & Marusic (2014). Furthermore, Rosi & Rival (2018) extended
this observation for accelerating shear layers and showed that for acceleration the
spacing of KHIs varies strongly with Re.
By conducting experiments over a wide range of Re, the present study attempts to
address the paradox that, on the one hand, the Re influence based on dimensional
analysis seems to be small, yet, on the other hand, the entrainment in free shear
layers is influenced by the small structures and thus Re. Particular focus lies on the
interaction of the Re scaling with the aforementioned VFE modifications.
1.2. Background on vortex-forming edge modification
For quasi-steady flows, applications of passive flow control by means of geometrical
modifications are well established, as already outlined by Carmichael (1981). For
instance, Lissaman (1983) demonstrated significant delay of flow separation on
stalling airfoils by means of tripping strips, fixed at the respective leading edges.
Similarly, vortex generators and bio-inspired serrations have been applied for airfoil
flow control by Lin (2002) and Ito (2009), respectively. Furthermore, lobe mixers have
been proven by McCormick & Bennett (1994) to reduce the noise through mixing in
the wake of jet engines. These examples underline the importance of the nonlinear
impact of convective effects, where the introduction of small-scale structures leads to
a significant change in behaviour of the global system.
In the category of separated flows, Usherwood & Ellington (2002), Rival et al.
(2014) and Leknys et al. (2018) investigated the influence of mild VFE modifications
for accelerating propulsors. Motivated by the reports of Hertel (1966) on the
dragonfly-wing leading edge, Usherwood & Ellington (2002) imprinted a spanwise
saw-like structure on the VFE under consideration. This study – most likely due
to the choice of a single wavelength – did not reveal notable influences of VFE
modifications on the flow and the measured forces. Rival et al. (2014) and Leknys
et al. (2018) focused on small changes of the leading-edge curvature and reported
small yet measurable delays on vortex formation.
The high impact of nonlinear effects onto quasi-steady flows and the already
measurable influence of VFE modifications in the case of small VFE modifications
suggest that there is merit in further investigation of a wider range of introduced
disturbances in separated flows. This is supported by the observation of significant
VFE modifications on propulsors in nature. The list of examples – even though from
strongly differing lineages – includes webbed frog feet (e.g. Johansson & Lauder
2004), the hind limbs of sea lions (e.g. Sawyer et al. 2016) and the tubercles on the
flippers of humpback whales (e.g. Fish & Lauder 2006); see also figure 1. Note that
each of those VFE modifications is of distinct wavelength , all significantly smaller
than the length scale L of the propulsor itself.
1.3. Objectives and procedure
The combined effects of VFE modification and Re scaling are investigated on the
reference case of an impulsively accelerated, rigid circular plate of diameter D.
This canonical flow for vortex formation was recently characterised by Fernando &
Rival (2016b) and combines several features, qualifying it as a suitable base case
for this study. First, the lack of leading-edge sweep, no rotational accelerations
of the propulsor and the absence of wing-tip or wing-body effects minimises
three-dimensional effects during vortex formation. Thus, the influence of small scales
in the flow can be observed without being superimposed by complex, global and
three-dimensional flow features. Second, Fernando & Rival (2016a) showed that, in
contrast to non-circular propulsors, the circular case produces a stable vortex, which
only pinches off after multiple diameters D travelled. The stable vortex allows a
longer observation time and provides the possibility to investigate the effects of VFE
modifications onto vortex stability. The bio-inspired VFE modifications are abstracted
from the undulatory examples mentioned in § 1.1 and modelled by adding a cosine
function of different wavelengths  with amplitude a D =4 onto the circular edge
geometry; see § 2.1 for more parameter details.
Early on during the onset of vortex formation, a thin layer of vorticity is produced
along the VFE on the varying plates, as indicated in figure 2(a–c). While the
frontal area remains constant for all plates, the effective perimeters vary due to the
superimposed waves. Therefore, it is expected that the magnitude and orientation of
vorticity generated on the edge should vary between the different geometries. During
the subsequent vortex formation, the shear layer detaches, rolls up and forms a vortex.
For the circular plate, the vortex evolution is well known (see figure 2d). The KHIs
appear during the plate’s acceleration and are continuously produced during the whole
vortex formation process, as has been shown by Wong et al. (2017) and Rosi & Rival
(2017). A high-vorticity core remains stable until azimuthal instabilities appear and
destabilise the system. The wavelength of the azimuthal instabilities and their onset
in a circular vortex ring depend on Re, which has been shown by Maxworthy (1977)
for vortices produced by a classical piston–cylinder vortex generator. Fernando &
Rival (2016b) confirmed the existence of the azimuthal instability for vortex rings in
the wake of an accelerated circular plate.
For the geometries with VFE modifications, however, the formation of the vortex
wake is yet unknown. Various wakes seem possible, all of which are outlined in
figure 2. It is hypothesised that the relation
BD=2 (1.1)
of the undulatory VFE modification height =2 to shear-layer thickness  is a crucial
relative quantity. Therefore, the flow around the plates is colour-coded accordingly
in figure 2, where red indicates flow around a smooth circular plate, and green
FIGURE 2. Summary sketches of possible flow topologies around various plate geometries;
(a–c) the shear layer directly after the onset of acceleration for different plate geometries;
and (d–i) different possible vortex formation topologies for varying Re and plate
geometries.
corresponds to VFE wavelengths in the order of magnitude of the shear-layer thickness
or smaller (B61). The flow around plates with VFE modifications with significantly
larger wavelengths is visualised in blue (B1). Three flow topologies seem possible
for small  (B 6 1). As a trivial solution, the effects of the VFE modifications
might be irrelevant or directly damped out such that the vortex formation would then
appear similar as for the unmodified circular plate (see figure 2e). The disturbances
introduced by the undulated VFE could also promote transition to a turbulent shear
layer, where the presence of turbulent small-scale structures directly corrupts the
forming KHIs (see figure 2g). Recent reports by Buchner, Honnery & Soria (2017)
suggest that a change of the dominant instability mechanism towards centrifugal
instabilities (CIs) is also possible. Small-scale VFE modifications could favour the
formation of CIs, as indicated in figure 2(h). The shear layer of larger undulatory
VFE modifications  (B1) might reorient towards a circle and roll up as discussed
for the smaller perturbations (similar to figure 2e). In contrast, a complete disruption
of the vortex formation process and an expedited transition to the fully separated
and turbulent state also seems possible (see figure 2f ). However, a mixture between
these above cases is most likely: a destabilised shear layer that rolls up to a complex
turbulent flow with a diffuse vortex core, as sketched in figure 2(i).
FIGURE 3. (a) Sketch of the chosen vortex-edge modification; wavelength , undulatory
disturbance amplitude a and mean plate diameter D. (b) Geometries with number of
undulations np D1, np D12, np D50 and np D200.
As a consequence of the above-outlined variety of possible flow conditions and
hypotheses, the objective of the present work centres around which VFE modifications
influence the unsteady vortex wake behind accelerating propulsors. A systematic
variation of  across a wide range of Re is performed by means of time-resolved
particle image velocimetry (PIV) and force measurements in an optical towing tank.
The resulting data serve as a basis to study the instability mechanisms as they
occur with varying wavelength  and/or Re. In particular, the footprint of the VFE
modifications in the vortex formation is evaluated with respect to the resulting loading
on the propulsor and the stability of the vortex wake itself.
2. Methods
2.1. Kinematics and parameter space
The kinematics and the Re space are chosen to match the previous study by Fernando
& Rival (2016b). The plates of mean diameter D are impulsively accelerated
perpendicular to their orientation to a terminal velocity of U1 within a distance
of s D s=D D 0:5, where s is the physical distance travelled. Two terminal velocities
U1 are compared, which correspond to Re D U1D= D 50 000 and Re D 350 000
based on constant values for plate diameter D and kinematic viscosity of water .
Three plates with undulatory VFE modifications of varying wavelengths  are
compared to a smooth circular plate (np D 1). The mean perimeter pD is divided
into np waves of length  D pD=np. To avoid the introduction of additional (and
confusing) length scales into the system, the wavelength  and amplitude a of the
introduced undulations are held constant at a ratio of a= D 1=4. Consequently, the
radius of the modified plates is defined as
R.'/DD=2C=4 cos.np'/; (2.1)
which is indicated in figure 3(a). The frontal surface area A of all plates is held
constant, which is achieved by iteratively adjusting D. Note that the addition of
the cosine function in combination with a constant frontal area A implies different
perimeters P for plates of different wavenumbers kp D 1= D np=pD. In particular,
the influence of the number of undulations, np D 12, np D 50 and np D 200, is tested.
FIGURE 4. Optical towing tank (a) and PIV set-up (b). The light sheet enters the
tank from the bottom window; multiple high-speed cameras (A, B and C) capture the
accelerating plate in a lab-fixed frame of reference.
Plate D (m) a (m) np (–) kp .m􀀀1/ A .m2/ P (m)
Base 0.300 0 1 1 0.707 0.942
200 0.300 0.012 200 212.2 0.707 1.390
50 0.300 0.047 50 53.1 0.707 1.381
12 0.298 0.195 12 12.8 0.707 1.423
TABLE 1. Parameters describing the various plate geometries tested here.
Additionally, the experiments for a circular plate (np D 1) from Fernando & Rival
(2016b) are repeated for reference and comparison. All plate geometries considered
are shown in figure 3(b); the geometrical details are also listed in table 1. The
plate with np D 50 leads to a length scale 2a similar to the spacing of KHIs and
the shear-layer thickness  (B  1). Accordingly, undulatory VFE modifications with
larger or smaller wavelengths (np D 200 and np D 12) introduce structures that are
smaller (B<1) or larger (B>1) than the shear-layer thickness, respectively.
2.2. Experimental set-up
The experiments were conducted in the 15 m long optical towing tank facility at
Queen’s University, as shown in figure 4(a). The cross-section spans 1 m  1 m
and is optically accessible from three sides. An overhead traverse is used to
tow models, where an additional non-transparent semi-enclosed ceiling minimises
free-surface effects. In the present study, the four plates considered were mounted
onto a cylindrical sting with a diameter of 0:08D and length 2D, which was further
connected to the traverse by a symmetric profile of thickness 0:08D. A six-component,
submersible ATI Nano force transducer was applied between the sting and the plates
to record force data at 1000 Hz with a static resolution of 0:125 N (see figure 4b).
Every parameter combination was repeated 20 times for s 6 33 and the data were
ensemble-averaged accordingly.
Complementary to the force measurements, the flow fields in the wake of all plates
were captured by means of time-resolved planar PIV, as shown in figure 4(b). A 2 mm
FIGURE 5. Overlapping FOVs and campaigns of the conducted PIV experiments (plate
motion from right to left).
Experiment Re Force I II III IV V VI VII
Base 50 000 X X X X — — — —
200 50 000 X X X X — — — —
50 50 000 X X X X — — — —
12top 50 000 X X X X — — — —
12bot 50 000 X X X X — — — —
Base 350 000 X — X X X X X X
200 350 000 X — X X — — — —
50 350 000 X — X X — — — —
12top 350 000 X — X X X X X X
12bot 350 000 X — X X X X X X
TABLE 2. Overview of the conducted experiments; roman numerals I–VII correspond to
different FOVs of the PIV set-up; cf. also figure 5.
thick light sheet was created through a 40 mJ pulse􀀀1 Photonics high-speed laser, and
then introduced into the tank through the bottom window. The light sheet was centred
parallel to the sidewalls in the tank and was tilted towards the towing direction to
avoid shadows in the wake.
Three multi-camera PIV campaigns were performed in a lab-fixed frame of
reference, as illustrated in figure 5 and listed in table 2. Raw images were recorded
at 200 frames per second (f.p.s.) for Re D 50 000 and 1400 f.p.s. for Re D 350 000.
Note that for plate 12 (np D12) the PIV measurements were performed twice per Re,
where the light sheet was either aligned with the maximum or with the minimum of
the plate radius (r D 169:3 mm, r D 129:3 mm). These two measurements are from
here on referred to as 12top and 12bot. Similar to the force measurements, 20 runs
of PIV data collection were performed for each set of parameters throughout all
campaigns.
Three cameras were used during the first measurement campaign to cover a
combined field of view (FOV) of s D 0–2:3 on the bottom half of the plate (see
figure 5). The early acceleration stage was captured in a small FOV (I in figure 5) of
0:7D  0:7D with a Photron Fastcam Mini WX100 (2048  2048 pixels, camera A)
to ensure sufficient spatial resolution near the VFE. Two additional Photron SA4
cameras (10241024 pixels, cameras B and C) captured the further evolution of the
vortex, where larger FOVs of 0:85D  0:85D (II and III in figure 5) were chosen to
account for the vortex growth. All cameras were equipped with AF-S Micro-Nikkor
60 mm 1:2.8G ED lenses, which resulted in a resolution of 9:8 pixel mm􀀀1 (FOV I)
and 4 pixel mm􀀀1 (FOVs II and III).
Owing to frame rate limitations, camera A (Mini WX100) was only used for the
lower-Re cases. The evaluation of the first campaign (i.e. the force measurements),
however, provided evidence to investigate later vortex formation stages – particularly
for the high-Re case. This insight will be elaborated in more detail in § 3. Therefore,
two additional PIV campaigns were performed for the circular and the np D 12 plate
and the higher Re (ReD350 000). The two Photron SA4 cameras (cameras B and C)
were readjusted to allow for an even larger FOV of 1:0D  1:0D and were used to
measure the vortex evolution from s D2:3–4:2 (campaign 2 – FOVs IV and V) and
s D4:2–6:1 (campaign 3 – FOVs VI and VII). The frame rates were kept identical to
campaign 1, but, owing to the larger FOV, the resolution decreased to 3:4 pixel mm􀀀1.
The raw images were pre-processed in MATLAB in terms of ensemble-based
median subtraction, edge detection and plate tracking, and masking of the shadowed
area. DaVis 8.4 was used to calibrate and process the data of each camera separately.
A multi-grid scheme with a final interrogation area of 32  32 pixels and 75%
overlap was chosen for FOVs II–VII. FOV I was evaluated with an interrogation
area of 48  48 pixels and 75% overlap. The resulting velocity fields of all 20 runs
were ensemble-averaged for each FOV. Finally, all FOVs were merged on a common
plate-fixed grid. Note that the interplay of accurate calibration, edge tracking and
good reproducibility of the flow even allows stitching of the separate campaigns to a
single FOV.
2.3. Analysis methods
To further analyse the ensemble-averaged and merged velocity fields, various
post-processing strategies are applied, each of which is outlined in this section
and indicated in figure 6.
Hunt, Wray & Moin (1988) introduced the second invariant Q of the velocity
gradient tensor as a robust means to locate vortical structures. Its maximum Qmax is
frequently applied to localise the core of such structures. More recently, Graftieaux,
Michard & Grosjean (2001) proposed two criteria (􀀀1 and 􀀀2) to identify the core
and boundaries of vortical structures, respectively. Huang & Green (2015) showed
that 􀀀 max
1 and Qmax lead to similar core locations in cases where the reference frame
for 􀀀1 was chosen appropriately, as indicated in figure 6(a) for a plate-fixed frame
of reference. However, the location rc.t/; zc.t/ of the vortex core is estimated based
on the Galilean invariant Qmax throughout the present work to avoid any possible
uncertainties resulting from reference-frame issues.
The Galilean invariant 􀀀2-criterion is chosen to identify the boundaries of vortical
structures for 􀀀2 D 2=p. The core locations rc.t/; zc.t/ are enclosed by one such
boundary (see black line in figure 6a), which is referred to as vortex core area A􀀀2 .
The equivalent diameter d and corresponding circulation 􀀀c of the vortex core are
determined by
FIGURE 6. Sample processing for case 12top, s D3:5. (a) Overview of applied methods:
.x0; y0/ coordinate system aligned with the shear layer (red); vortex core centres (rc; zc)
determined with 􀀀1 and Q; horizontal line through the vortex core (light blue); vortex core
boundaries evaluated with 􀀀2 (black); control volume for total vortex circulation (orange).
(b) Velocity vectors and vorticity contours of the .x0; y0/ domain (red box). (c) Spatially
averaged profiles of velocity huy0 iy0 and vorticity h!'0 iy0 . Black lines in panels (b) and (c)
indicate the domain for the calculation of circulation flux 􀀀Psl.
An estimate of total vortex circulation 􀀀 including the shear layer is derived from
the integration of vorticity across a large control volume behind the plate, which is
highlighted orange in figure 6(a). The lower boundary of the control volume is fixed at
r=DD0:19 to exclude the secondary vortex from the circulation budget. The secondary
vortex occurs during the later stages of the flow and near the centre of the plate;
see § 3.
Recent reports on vortex formation evaluated the convective fluxes through a cut
perpendicular to the propulsor and directly behind the flow separation to estimate the
circulation flux 􀀀Psl from the shear layer into the vortex; see for instance Eslam Panah
et al. (2015) or Akkala & Buchholz (2017). The present work attempts to advance
beyond this plate-oriented approach to overcome two shortcomings. First, the optical
access to the shear layer is blocked in the immediate vicinity of the VFE for 12bot,
since the plate is an obstruction in front of the light sheet due to radius changes; see
(2.1). The velocity information in this region, therefore, remains unknown. Second,
instabilities in the shear layer lead to a strong fluctuation of the circulation flux over
time due to KHIs.
Consequently, the flux evaluation is shifted slightly leeward and away from the solid
structure, and a spatial average of the shear layer is evaluated to smooth the effects
of instabilities. This four-step approach is illustrated in figure 6. First, the average
velocity of the shear layer is evaluated in the red dashed area behind the plate to
determine the shear-layer orientation. This direction is then aligned with the y0-axis
of a .x0; y0/ coordinate system. A close-up of this tilted .x0; y0/ domain (solid red box)
is shown in figure 6(b). Profiles of spatially averaged velocity huy0 iy0 and out-of-plane
vorticity h!'iy0 along y0 are shown in figure 6(c). The origin of x0 is set to collapse
with the maximum of h!'iy0 . The spatial filter along y0 minimises the influence of
remaining PIV uncertainties and small-scale instabilities in the shear layer.
FIGURE 7. Force history Cd.s/ for all plate geometries and Re; the shaded area indicates
the scatter through a 2 uncertainty margin. Significant force deviations for the np D 12
plate are emphasised in the close-up of panel (b).
Despite slight shear-layer thickness variations, a band of 􀀀0:025D < x0 < 0:025D
was found to be a reasonable and robust domain for the circulation-flux calculation,
since !' 0 in the vicinity of the shear layer:
􀀀Psl D
Z 0:025D
x0D􀀀0:025D
huy0 iy0 h!'iy0 dx0: (2.4)
Note that more accurate strategies to approximate the shear-layer thickness (see e.g.
Brown & Roshko 1974) do not apply for the present data, as only  5–6 velocity
vectors are found within the width of the shear layer itself.
3. Results
First, the impact of edge undulations and Re scaling on the overall force histories
is evaluated in § 3.1. Complementary to force measurements, velocity and ensembleaveraged
vorticity fields provide insight into the underlying flow patterns for varying
VFE modifications and Re, as addressed in § 3.2.
3.1. Forces
The force histories of each run were temporally filtered with a least-squares estimator
as per Savitzky & Golay (1964) and ensemble-averaged across 20 runs. Subsequent
normalisation of the force (drag) was performed as follows:
Cd D
2jFzj
AU21
; (3.1)
as presented in figure 7. To further check the repeatability of the measurements and
uncover significant case-to-case variations, two standard deviations .2/ are added
to the plots. The small uncertainty margins during acceleration, with its associated
added-mass peak (0:06s60:5), relaxation stage (0:5<s<2:5) and the stable vortexgrowth
stage (2:5 6 s 6 5 for Re D 50 000, 2:5 6 s 6 9 for Re D 350 000) indicate
good repeatability. Once the flow destabilises and detaches from the plate, the run-torun
scatter increases by an order of magnitude, which indicates the sensitivity of this
instability-triggered topology change. Finally, beyond s >20, the fully separated and
turbulent flow collapses to similar terminal values Cd, which implies that this stage is
stable and highly repeatable again.
Interestingly, no significant variations of the drag coefficient are found between
the circular reference plate and the small-scale modifications np D 50 and np D 200
for both Re – despite considerable changes in the perimeter. Only the force history
of the np D 12 plate deviates from the circular base case, which still lies within the
uncertainty margin for ReD50 000 (see figure 7a). For ReD350 000, in contrast, the
np D12 plate generates a significantly higher force during the vortex-growth stage as
compared to the reference and small-scale cases. A close-up of this difference is added
to figure 7(b) so as to emphasise the 20% offset in relation to the small uncertainty
margin. Note that the abscissa of the inset starts from s D 2:0, since the forces
are significantly higher during the early acceleration (s 6 0:5) and relaxation
(0:5 < s < 2:5). During the acceleration, the forces collapse for identical plate
cross-sections A.
The force deviation for the stable vortex-growth stage implies that the largeamplitude
VFE modification of the np D 12 plate significantly influences the vortex
formation process. However, the vortex topology remains similar in the wake.
Consequently, the wavy shear layer still rolls up into a vortex, which remains
attached to the plate for a comparable duration as with the circular reference case.
To explore these differences, we now turn to the flow fields.
3.2. Field data
To compare the early vortex formation process (1:25 6 s 6 2:25) of the various
plate geometries, the vorticity fields for all cases are shown in figures 8 and 9 for
Re D 50 000 and Re D 350 000, respectively. Note that only selected vorticity fields
are displayed here for the sake of brevity. The complete temporal evolution (s <2:3)
of all cases is provided in a supplementary movie (see Movie1.mp4) available at
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2019.908.
The circular plate (Base, np D 1) and the high-wavenumber plates (np D 50 and
np D 200) reveal similar results in the force measurements for both Re (see figure 7).
The corresponding PIV measurements confirm these results, where the similarity of the
extracted vorticity fields (see figures 8 and 9) indicates that similar topologies during
the early relaxation stage (s D 1:25) and during the late relaxation stage (s D 2:25)
are equivalent for the three geometries (np 2 f1; 200; 50g) and both Re. The strong
repeatability of the measurements, furthermore, leads to clear visualisations of the
dominant KHI. Neither disturbances smaller than the shear-layer thickness  (B < 1,
np D200) nor disturbances of the same order of magnitude (B1, np D50) affect the
instability mechanism or lead to significant corruption of the KHI. Also, the influence
of Re onto the instabilities is small, since the same spatial offsets of consecutive
KHI structures are found in the shear layer for both Re; compare figures 8(a)–(i)
and 9(a)–(i). It is important to mention at this point that this finding does not hold for
the earlier stage of plate acceleration (s <0:5), as reported by Rosi & Rival (2017).
The similarity between the circular case and the small-scale VFE modifications
(np 2 f1; 200; 50g) indicates that the shear-layer formation smoothes the spanwise
FIGURE 8. Early vortex formation at Re D 50 000: vorticity fields in the range of
1:25 6 s 6 2:25 for all plate geometries. Similar results for no and small-scale VFE
modifications (np 2f1; 200; 50g) – also applies for ReD350 000, cf. figure 9. KHI length
scale variation and convection of oppositely signed vorticity from the leeward boundary
layer for large-scale VFE modifications (np D12).
spatial disturbances smaller than or in the range of the shear-layer thickness (B 6 1).
The force histories (see § 3.1) and also the vorticity fields of the smallest tested
wavenumber np D 12 lead to the observation that such geometrical disturbances
become influential once their length scale  exceeds the shear-layer thickness itself
(B1).
1:25 6 s 6 2:25 for all plate geometries. Similar results for no and small-scale VFE
modifications (np 2 f1; 200; 50g). Note that the KHI spacing remains constant for
the small-scale VFE modifications (np 2 f1; 200; 50g), but is reduced for np D 12 at
ReD350 000 compared to ReD50 000, cf. figure 8.
Figures 8( j)–(o) and 9( j)–(o) present the early evolution of the vortex in the
12top and 12bot measurement plane, where the laser sheet cuts the vortex at the
maximum and minimum radius of the plate, respectively. The non-circular shape
of the vorticity maximum in the vortex core can be associated with significant
vortex stretching. Figure 10 presents the out-of-plane gradient of the out-of-plane
velocity .1=r/ @u'=@'. Furthermore, in contrast to the high-wavenumber geometries
(np 2 f1; 200; 50g), the main part of the vortical structure in the 12top plane is
located at a smaller radius than the maximum radius of the undulated vortex edge at
R D D=2 C a. Recent surface pressure measurements on wings by Eslam Panah et al.
(2015) and Akkala & Buchholz (2017) provide evidence that this vortex position
leads to an adverse pressure gradient in parts of the boundary layer between vortex
and plate, which in turn results in a flux of (positive) vorticity from the plate into
the vortex (see also Lighthill 1963). While the positive vorticity in the boundary
layer between the leeward side of the plate and the vortex wake is not sufficiently
well resolved in the PIV measurements, the advected positive vorticity is clearly
visible in figures 8( j)–(l) and 9( j)–(l). The advected vorticity cross-annihilates with
the shear-layer vorticity and thus reduces the circulation growth of the vortex itself.
In addition, this cross-annihilation also changes the wavelength of the KHI, which
– in contrast to the geometries np 2 f1; 200; 50g – varies significantly between the
low- and high-Re case. Interestingly, the 12top case comprises significant amounts of
engulfment from the irrotational outer region between the shear layer and the vortex.
Figures 8 and 9 reveal differences during the early stages of vortex formation
between the high-wavenumber cases (np 2 f1; 200; 50g) and the low-wavenumber
case .np D 12/. Despite the topological differences between these cases, the drag
coefficient Cd is similar for all geometries and Re during the plates acceleration and
the relaxation stage. Only for the high-Re case .Re D 350 000/ and for later stages
(s > 2:5) do significant differences between the cases exist, which in turn motivated
the additional PIV experiments for 2:3 6s 6 6 and ReD350 000; cf. § 2.2.
The resulting vorticity fields for the circular and np D 12 plates are shown in
figure 11 and are available in a supplementary movie (see Movie2.mp4). A secondary
vortex appears near the plate centre in all measurements. In comparison with figure 9,
the shear layer weakens for both cases. Yet the shear layer remains more pronounced
for the non-circular plate (np D12). However, the interaction of shear layer and vortex
core varies between the circular and the non-circular plate. At s D3, the shear layer
of the circular plate gets deflected by the vortex core, convects around the vortex
centre, and eventually merges with the low-vorticity region in the core vicinity. At the
largest plate radius of the small-wavenumber plate (12top), the shear layer is furthest
from the core, where parts of the shear layer even start to convect into the wake
from s D 3; see figure 11(d) and supplementary movie Movie2.mp4. In contrast, the
shear layer at the smallest plate radius (12bot) directly convects into the vortex core,
FIGURE 11. Differences in the long-term vortex formation for the circular plates and
np D 12 at Re D 350 000: stronger shear layer, higher turbulence level and more diffuse
vortex core for both np D12 measurements compared to the circular case. Counter-rotating
vortex near the axis for both cases. Black lines show vortex boundaries of 􀀀2 D 2=p.
The connected area A􀀀2 around the maximum vorticity core is defined as the vortex core
(cf. § 2.3).
as indicated in figure 11(g)–(i). The vortex core behind the circular plate remains
coherent within the measured FOV s <6. The vortex core boundaries – as introduced
in § 2.3 – enclose a small area where rotation dominates shear. The corresponding
core boundary for the np D12 plate appears larger and accordingly comprises a more
diffuse vortex core. Furthermore, the area of the overall vortex is larger, while its
maximum vorticity is smaller due to turbulent mixing. The secondary vortex near
the np D 12 plate centre is found to be corrupted and, therefore, less pronounced as
compared to the circular plate.
4. Discussion
This section focuses on a quantitative comparison between vortex formation on the
plate with wavenumber np D12 and the circular base case. Simple models are applied
to elucidate the physics behind the most important observations stated in § 3 and the
influence of the ratio B; see (1.1). First, the changes in shear layers for varying plate
geometries and their effects on the vortex circulation are analysed (§ 4.1). Second, a
discussion on how the vortices stay attached to the plate for similar periods of time,
even though the vortex wake behind the np D 12 plate is significantly less coherent
FIGURE 12. Vorticity distribution directly after the plate and perpendicular to the flow
(see figure 6) for ReD50 000 (dotted lines) and ReD350 000 (solid lines) for different s
and geometries. Left of the shear layer: vorticity-free outer flow. Right of the shear layer:
vortex wake.
(§ 4.2), is presented. Finally, the physical mechanism behind the changes in force
is addressed (§ 4.3) by considering the momentum and size of the vortex wake and
estimating the pressure in front of and behind the plates.
4.1. Feeding shear layer and vortex wake circulation
When recalling the similar spacing of KHIs (figures 8 and 9), it was hypothesised that
the shear-layer thicknesses  for both Re under consideration would be similar. This is
confirmed in figure 12. Applying the methods introduced in § 2.3, figure 12 presents
the averaged vorticity distribution perpendicular to the shear layer. No significant
influence of Re on the shear-layer thickness  is observed.
The similarities between all high-wavenumber plates (B 6 1, np 2 f1; 50; 200g),
as observed in §§ 3.1 and 3.2, are confirmed. In contrast, the maximal vorticity in
the shear layer is consistently higher for the np D 12 plate (B  1). However, with
regards to the temporal change of circulation in the vortex, the higher vorticity in the
shear layer is balanced by a flux of oppositely signed vorticity from the leeward side
of the plate during the early stages (figure 12b,c), as parts of the fed vorticity are
directly annihilated. For the later stages of the vortex formation process (s > 2:5),
less vorticity diffuses from the leeward boundary layer (see figure 12d). Yet the shear
layer is still more pronounced compared to the circular plate. As a consequence, the
circulation fed through the shear layer is higher for np D12 than for the other plates.
Applying (2.4), the circulation flux through the shear layer is evaluated. Figure 13(a)
shows, as expected, high 􀀀Psl during the early stages, where the forces are also higher.
FIGURE 13. (a) Circulation flux through the feeding shear layer 􀀀Psl for 1 < s < 6 for
the varying cases at Re D 350 000. Blue lines depict the average of 12top and 12bot.
(b) Accumulated circulation in the vortex wake for 1<s <6.
During the stable vortex growth (s > 2:5), 􀀀Psl remains fairly constant for each
geometry. However, the circulation flux of the small-wavenumber plate (np D 12) is
higher than for the circular reference case. The overall circulation behind the plate,
and as such in the vortex wake, is captured in figure 13(b). Despite the differing
circulation flux through the feeding shear layers, the temporal development of overall
circulation in the vortex is similar. A superposition of various circulation-reducing
mechanisms in the vortex itself is hypothesised as mechanisms to limit the circulation
growth:
(i) reorientation of vorticity, followed by cross-annihilation in the turbulent vortex
wake;
(ii) loss of circulation due to convection of vorticity into the wake;
(iii) interaction and cross-annihilation of vorticity in the primary vortex with the
vorticity in the secondary vortex; and
(iv) interaction of the vortex with the boundary layer on the leeward side of the plate.
The above mechanisms are more pronounced in the highly turbulent wake of the noncircular
geometry (B1, np D 12) and, as such, compensate for the higher 􀀀Psl. As
a consequence, there only remain small differences in the overall circulation budget
(see figure 13b).
4.2. Vortex core and its stability
The position of the vortex centre is estimated by the maximum of the Q-criterion (see
§ 2.3) and is presented in figure 14(a). The undulatory shape of the small-wavenumber
plate (np D12) influences the vortex core radius rc and its distance from the plate zc.
Relative to the circular plate (Base), rc is either larger (12top) or smaller (12bot). Yet
the average position (blue solid line) is similar to the radial position of the circular
plate’s vortex centre. However, the axial position zc increases more quickly for the
small-wavenumber plate np D12 than for the circular plate (dashed lines).
The distinct rc values in the 12top and 12bot planes suggest an undulatory
shape of the vortex wake, which most likely results in a significant radial vorticity
FIGURE 14. Results for ReD350 000. (a) Vortex centre position based on the maximum
of the Q-criterion. The blue line depicts the average of 12top and 12bot. (b) Magnitude
of radial velocity along a horizontal cut through the vortex centre estimated by the Qcriterion,
for s D5. The distance between the two maxima is defined as the vortex core
diameter dz. (c) Vorticity along a horizontal cut through the vortex core, for s D5.
component !r in between the measurement planes 12top and 12bot and induces
stretching of the vortex core as depicted in figure 10. The stretching contributes
to the qualitative differences between the different plates concerning the coherence,
symmetry and size of the vortex core reported in § 3.2 and further discussed utilising
figure 14(b) and (c). The magnitude of velocity (jurj) and the vorticity (!') are
presented in a horizontal cut through the vortex centre .rc; zc/ (see dashed blue
line in figure 6). Note that, while ur is the radial velocity in the coordinate system
introduced in § 2, it also represents the azimuthal velocity of the vortex wake itself.
Maxworthy (1977) defines the horizontal distance between the velocity peaks on
both sides of the vortex core as the core diameter dz (see figure 14b). This dz provides
similar results to the reduced vortex core diameter d defined in § 2 (see figure 15a,b).
The vorticity peak of the circular plate’s vortex is higher, while its diameter dz is
significantly smaller as for the plate with np D12.
As mentioned in § 1.2, Maxworthy (1972) related the laminar-to-turbulent transition
of a vortex ring with an azimuthal instability. The vortex core of diameter d develops
a wavy structure along the ring with radius rc (similar to the shape of the geometries
in this study), which amplifies in time and finally corrupts the vortex core itself. The
onset and wavelength of the azimuthal instability depends on Re. Counter-intuitively,
smaller Re lead to an earlier onset of instability (Maxworthy 1977). While the
findings of Maxworthy are based on careful analysis of piston–cylinder vortex
generators, Fernando & Rival (2016b) captured the same instability mechanism
for the vortex formation on a circular plate and observed an earlier vortex pinch-off
for smaller Re. Combining the earlier vortex pinch-off for smaller Re observed by
Fernando & Rival (2016b) with the earlier onset of the instability for smaller Re
observed by Maxworthy (1977) suggests a causal relationship between the vortex
core corruption and the vortex pinch-off. The core transition leads to reorientation
of vorticity, followed by cross-annihilation and eventually a reduced circulation 􀀀c in
(based on 􀀀2); and (b) dz estimated by the distance of the maxima in figure 14(b).
(c) Circulation in the vortex core as identified by the boundary 􀀀2 D2=p.
the vortex core. Furthermore, the additional mixing results in a more diffuse (and as
such larger) vortex core.
Figure 14(b) supports modelling the vortex core as a Rankine vortex, and thus its
core as a solid-body rotation. Applying this model, the pressure difference between
the vortex centre p.rc; zc/ and the pressure at the core boundary p.rc; zc C d=2/ can
be estimated by
p.rc; zc/􀀀p

rc; zc C
d
2

D􀀀
􀀀 2
c
2p2d2 ; (4.1)
where 􀀀c is the circulation of the core. Equation (4.1) clarifies that both effects of
transition, the reduction of j􀀀cj as well as the increasing core diameter d, decrease
the magnitude of the pressure minimum in the core. This leads to vortex pinch-off, as
the attracting forces from the vortex core towards the plate are eventually insufficient
to avoid pinch-off.
While explaining the Re scaling of the vortex stability in the wake of a circular
plate, the chain of events described above contradicts at first glance the fact that the
vortex behind the np D12 plate is stable. For this geometry, even before the onset of
an azimuthal instability, the vortex core is already turbulent. This turbulence leads to
a growth of the vortex core size: d and dz (figure 15a,b). Hence, according to (4.1), a
comparable core pressure minimum similar to the circular plate can only exist if the
core circulation also grows in time. The magnitude of core circulation j􀀀cj (see (2.3))
is shown in figure 15(c). While j􀀀cj slightly decreases over time for the circular plate,
j􀀀cj increases in the vortex core of the np D12 plate. The growth of j􀀀cj results from
the direct merging of shear layer and vortex core at the lowest plate radius (12bot,
see § 3.2 and in particular figure 11g–i). As a consequence, even though the vortex
formation and as such the physics behind the stabilisation are distinct, the magnitude
of the pressure minimum is similar for both plate geometries and both vortex cores
stay attached to the plate.
The quantitative evaluation of the vortex wake circulation 􀀀 (figure 13b), the radial
position of the vortex centre rc (figure 14a) and the approximate pressure at the vortex
centre (4.1) provide similar results. As such, the physical phenomenon behind the
force enhancement up to 20% (see § 3.1) for the small-wavenumber plate (np D 12)
as yet remains unclear and is addressed in the following. Two distinct approaches to
reconstruct forces from the measured data are applied. First, the momentum of the
flow is discussed. It provides an intuitive explanation for the force enhancement but
does not resolve the measured propulsion force to its full extent. This is achieved by
the second approach, i.e. the evaluation of the pressure at the plate’s surface.
Motivated by the different observed vortex sizes during the later stages of the
measurement (see figure 11), a simple model is applied to estimate the influence of
vortex volume growth on the rate of change of momentum and as such the propulsion
force. By assuming the vortex of growing volume V travels with approximately the
same velocity as the plate U1, the momentum in the axial direction can be split into
the contribution of the vortex momentum, Iv DVU1, and the momentum of the also
time-dependent flow outside of the vortex, Io:
Iz DIv CIo DVU1 CIo: (4.2)
During the later stages of vortex formation (s > 2:5), where distinct forces
were measured for the different geometries, the plate velocity U1 is constant. The
approximated force results in
Fz DIPz DFv CFo DVPU1 C P Io; (4.3)
where Fv D P Iv DVPU1 and Fo D P Io. The fluid mass V, which travels with the plate,
and as such can be considered as part of the vortex, is analysed in the following.
Multiple mechanisms lead to a growing vortex mass V. The vorticity-containing
shear layer feeds mass into the vortex volume (Wong, Kriegseis & Rival 2013). In
addition, turbulent entrainment (Rosi & Rival 2018), as well as engulfment of inviscid
fluid (e.g. figure 9), adds additional mass to the vortex core. The additional fluid,
which subsequently travels with the propulsor, also requires momentum. Similar to
the findings of McPhaden & Rival (2018), equation (4.3) suggests that the change
of vortex volume influences the propulsion forces. To approximate the instantaneous
vortex volume V, the topology of the flow is analysed. The streamline originating
in the node behind the plate is identified (red line in figure 16a) and the underlying
vortex volume is defined as V. Figure 16(b) shows the temporal evolution of the vortex
volumes. The large disturbances due to the undulatory VFE of plate 12 result in a
turbulent vortex wake and thus in additional entrainment. For the small-wavenumber
plate (np D 12), the volume is estimated by linear interpolation between the results
from 12top and 12bot. A linear fit on V (figure 16b) is utilised to estimate the force
contribution Fv of the growing vortex wake of the respective geometries (F12
v and
FBase
v ) in the interval 3 6 s 6 6; see figure 17(a). The trends of the reconstructed
forces Fv are consistent with the trends of the forces measured by the force transducer
Fz, i.e. F12
v >FBase
v . However, Fz is not reproduced to its full extent, as the contribution
of Fo is unknown and missing.
To obtain a more accurate force reconstruction, the pressure distribution at the plate
is estimated. Multiple steps are performed for each dataset: the circular plate (Base),
12top and 12bot.
FIGURE 16. (a) Vortex size estimation based on the outer streamlines of the vortex; shown
here at s D 6 for the circular plate at Re D 350 000. The red line denotes the estimated
vortex boundary. (b) Vortex volumes shown for the varying cases at Re D 350 000 over
travelled distance of the plate s. The blue line represents the average of 12top and 12bot.
for the pressure evaluation: (a) shadowed area in front of the plate and (b) the far field
extending the FOV of the measurement. The areas of potential flow solution and their
respective Neumann boundary conditions are highlighted: measured velocity data (solid
lines), ur D0 (dashed lines), uz D0 (dotted lines). The plate position is depicted in green.
(c) Propulsion force at Re D 350 000 measured by the force transducer (Fz; same as
figure 7b), estimated by the plate’s surface integral of the pressure (Fp) and by the rate
of change of vortex momentum (Fv DVPU1).
(1) The area directly in front of the plate was not captured, as the plate itself
casts a shadow (see figure 4b). The flow field in the shadowed area is
reconstructed by employing a two-dimensional potential flow solver. As presented
in figure 17(b), the measured velocity data (solid lines), the impermeability of
FIGURE 18. Results for ReD350 000. Pressure fields evaluated by means of the ensemblebased
approach of Kling et al. (2019) at s D 4:5 for (a) the circular plate, (b) 12top
and (c) 12bot. The vortex wake of the circular plate shows steeper pressure gradients,
resulting in a higher pressure at the leeward side of the plate and, as such, a smaller
propulsion force. Owing to the unknown out-of-plane velocity/gradients in the highly threedimensional
vortex core of the undulated plate (see figure 10), the core area is excluded
from the pressure calculation for 12top and 12bot.
the plate (dotted line) and the symmetry of the flow (dashed line) are utilised as
Neumann boundary conditions (NBC).
(2) In addition, the potential flow solver is used to extend the limited FOV of the
measurement. NBC are applied at the boundaries of the flow area of interest
(see figure 17c). While the measured velocity data provide NBC at the FOV
boundaries (solid lines), the far-field NBC are estimated to be ur D 0 at the
upper and lower boundaries (dashed lines) and uz D 0 at the windward and
leeward boundaries (dotted lines). Note that these far-field NBC are only an
approximation. To reduce the influence of these imperfect NBC, a large area of
13D4D is selected to reconstruct the far field.
(3) The pressure field p is evaluated by applying the ensemble-based pressure
estimation method of Kling et al. (2019). An ensemble-based Reynolds
decomposition is applied on the divergence of the momentum equation. Kling
et al. (2019) calculate the Reynolds stresses by means of the variance and
covariance of the ensemble-averaged data at a single time instant. As only 20
runs were performed in the present experiment, the method is extended by
an additional moving temporal average in the plate-fixed frame of reference
over 100 time steps. Furthermore, due to the two-dimensional measurements
in the present study, u', @ur=@' and @uz=@' are unknown. Therefore, for the
undulated plate, the vortex core is excluded from the pressure reconstruction, as
significant out-of-plane gradients exist in this region (see figure 10). The far-field
solution estimated in the previous step of the calculation allows application of
the required Dirichlet boundary condition p0 Dconst. far away from the plate, in
particular at the upper boundary of the far-field solution. The NBC are derived
from the momentum equations. The estimated pressure fields 1p D p 􀀀 p0 are
presented in figure 18 for s D4:5.
4) The reconstructed axial force resulting from the pressure field Fp is evaluated by
integration of the pressure along the plate’s front and back surfaces:
Fp D
Z
Afront
p dA􀀀
Z
Aback
p dA: (4.4)
The net force on the undulatory plate (npD12) is estimated by averaging between
the two measurement planes F12
p DF12bot
p CF12top
p .
Despite the limitations of the two-dimensional data and the limited number of
measurement planes, the estimated forces Fp closely resemble the forces measured by
the transducer Fz (see figure 17a). This good agreement of the integral value provides
evidence to further interpret the instantaneous pressure fields presented in figure 18:
the larger and more diffuse vortex core in the wake of the undulatory plate results in
less steep pressure gradients and thus in a lower pressure at the leeward side of the
plate, which in turn explains the higher propulsion force.
5. Conclusions
The convergence of unsteady propulsion in nature for a broad range of Re at first
glance suggests a minor impact of turbulence and small-scale structures on vortex
formation. Conversely, recent studies on free shear layers and the influence of Re
on entrainment refute this argument. This study explores the impact of small-scale
coherent structures on vortex formation. This problem is, on the one hand, addressed
by performing measurements for a wide range of Re, where at higher Re it is expected
that the size of the smallest structures in the flow will be reduced. On the other
hand, disturbances of distinct wavelengths  are introduced into to flow. Motivated
by varying undulations on propulsors of swimming animals, the disturbances are
introduced into the flow by modifying the VFE of accelerating low-aspect-ratio plates.
The relation BD=.2/ (see (1.1)) hereby describes the height of the undulation =2
relative to the length scale of the shear-layer thickness . As such, this study explores
the influence of varying edge undulation on vortex formation over wide ranges of B
and Re.
Conclusions relating to the scaling of B and Re are categorised below with regard
to vortex stability and forces on the propulsor.
(1) The influence of edge undulations strongly depends on the relation B. The
shear layer and, as such, the forming vortex are found to be insensitive to VFE
modifications smaller than or similar to the shear-layer thickness . The vortex
formation process is only affected significantly for large-scale VFE modifications
(B1).
(2) For B  1, the force is increased during the stable vortex-growth stage. Up
to 20% higher forces are measured in the present study. A change in vortex
volume growth and a more diffuse vortex core are identified as the cause of
these variations. This observed increase in force is likely one cause for the
undulatory VFE modifications observed in nature.
(3) For all geometries tested here, the wake vortices remain stable over an equivalent
normalised distance. Yet a different mechanism stabilises the vortex for large 
(B  1). The vortex wake for the circular base case depends on the coherence
of its vortex core to remain stable. Transition due to azimuthal instabilities leads
to vortex pinch-off. For larger VFE modifications B  1, the vortex core is
turbulent from the start. However, the circulation of the turbulent and spatially
expanding core grows continuously, preserving the magnitude of the required
pressure minimum inside the core.
(4) For small VFE modifications (B61) other than the known Re scaling associated
with the azimuthal instability (Fernando & Rival 2016b), no additional scaling
was observed. In accordance with findings on quasi-steady free shear layers
(Ho & Huerre 1984), neither the spacing of KHIs nor the shear-layer thickness
 vary within the available accuracy of the data and within the Re range
under consideration. The existence and the effects of coherent structures that
are significantly smaller than the observed KHIs cannot be evaluated with the
available data. Repeating the high-resolution particle tracking experiments of
Rosi & Rival (2018) for the quasi-steady regime of the flow could provide
insight if additional entrainment due to very small structures occurs at high Re.
In contrast, for the case of B  1, higher Re leads to smaller spacing of the
KHIs. Following the model of Rosi & Rival (2017), the smaller spacing could
result in higher entrainment, a faster-growing vortex volume and consequently a
higher overall force. As such, the higher impact of coarse VFE modifications in
cases of larger Re can be motivated by the observed smaller KHI spacing.
By selecting an impulsively accelerated, rigid circular plate as the canonical
base flow of the present study, the effects of VFE undulations are isolated from
other influencing factors such as propulsor flexibility, varying propulsor shape and
complex kinematics, as found in nature and engineering applications. It is, therefore,
hypothesised that proper VFE undulation design (B1), convective mixing inside the
vortex and entrainment along the vortex boundaries should also increase and affect
the overall forces for more complex base flows. However, future detailed studies
will be required to test these complex interactions. As a final remark, it is also
worth mentioning that the present study mainly focuses on the later stages of vortex
formation, due to the distinct propulsion forces measured for s > 2:5. Future work
could address the early stages of vortex formation s < 0:5, where the plate is still
accelerated, and extend the work of Rosi & Rival (2017) by assessing the influence
of distinct acceleration rates on the vortex wake of undulated plates.
Acknowledgements
The authors greatly acknowledge the help of N. Kling, who provided his code for
the pressure evaluation from unsteady PIV data and contributed significantly during
the code modification and its application to the present data. Furthermore, the authors
acknowledge the support by the Karlsruhe House of Young Scientists (KHYS) for
F.K.’s scholarship to support his research abroad in Canada. D.E.R. would also like
to acknowledge NSERC.
Supplementary movies
Supplementary movies are available at https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2019.908.




















