Abstract〞We describe the development of feedback control for 
autonomous underwater gliders. Feedback is introduced to make 
the glider motion robust to disturbances and uncertainty. Our 
focus is on buoyancy-propelled, fixed-wing gliders with attitude 
controlled by means of active internal mass redistribution. We 
derive a nonlinear dynamic model of a nominal glider complete 
with hydrodynamic forces and coupling between the vehicle and 
the movable internal mass. We use this model to study stability 
and controllability of glide paths and to derive feedback control 
laws. For our analysis, we restrict to motion in the vertical plane 
and consider linear control laws. For illustration, we apply our 
methodology to a model of our own laboratory-scale underwater 
glider. 
Index Terms〞Autonomous underwater vehicles, buoyancy control, 
glider control, glider dynamics, movable mass, underwater 
gliders.
I. INTRODUCTION 
IN RELATION to existing methods of ocean sampling, 
autonomous underwater gliders offer a host of technical 
advantages: superior spatial and temporal measurement density, 
longer duration missions, and greater operational flexibility. 
These advantages are expected to be greatest when multiple 
gliders are operated cooperatively in a network. The underwater 
glider concept, initially conceived by Henry Stommel 
, has motivated the development of several operational 
gliders, including the SLOCUM glider, the ※Spray§ glider 
and the ※Seaglider§. These are all buoyancy-propelled, 
fixed-winged gliders which shift internal ballast to control 
attitude. Each has many useful features ranging from low 
operational and capital costs, and low noise and vibration to 
high reliability due to simplicity of design, minimal reliance on 
battery power, and low vulnerability of actuator mechanisms 
to the harsh effects of seawater. 
In order for the advantages in ocean sampling using underwater 
gliders to be fully realized, an accurate and reliable glider 
control system should be developed. Most importantly, the use 
of feedback control provides a measure of robustness to uncertainty 
and disturbances. In this paper, we derive a nonlinear 
dynamic model and describe the first steps in development of 
model-based control for a class of underwater gliders, namely 
those with fixed external surfaces which can control buoyancy 
and center of gravity (CG). We emphasize an approach that 
is widely applicable rather than exclusively vehicle-specific; 
accordingly, this work complements the efforts on SLOCUM, 
Spray and Seaglider. 
On SLOCUM, the ballast tanks are configured within the vehicle 
to provide the proper pitching moment during upwards and 
downwards glides. A sliding battery mass is used for 
fine adjustments in pitch and roll. Sensors measure depth, pitch, 
roll, and compass heading. Vehicle position at the surface is determined 
through GPS fix. The pitch angle, an assumed angle 
of attack, and a vertical speed computed from depth measurements 
are used to estimate the horizontal speed of the glider. The 
glider control system periodically checks the glider attitude and 
adjusts the position of the sliding battery mass. The timing of 
mass position adjustments can be changed depending on glider 
performance during the glide. Switching between downwards 
and upwards glides is performed open loop, i.e., the ballast is 
changed and the sliding mass is moved to a new position. 
Sensing and control on other gliders is similar. For example, 
Spray performs active control of pitch and roll every 40 s 
using measured pitch and heading errors. In the case of pitch, 
a low-gain proportional control law is used, and in the case of 
heading, proportional plus integral control is used. 
Our program initiated in this paper to develop a model-based, 
feedback control design methodology is intended to improve 
upon the currently implemented glider control strategies. A systematic 
design methodology that provides control in the full 
state-space is expected to make it possible to design glider controllers 
that require less experimentation and tuning and provide 
more robustness to fouling, payload changes and other uncertainties 
as compared to current techniques. Additionally, with 
a model-based approach, a dynamic observer can be designed 
to estimate states such as glider velocity. These estimated states 
could then be used to determine horizontal glider motion instead 
of the current methods which rely on assumptions of constant 
angle of attack. A model-based approach may also prove useful 
in determining optimal glider motions. 
The dynamic glider model we derive here describes a glider 
with simple body and wing shape. Control is applied to two point 
masses inside the vehicle: the first point mass has variable mass 
but fixed position while the second point mass has fixed mass but 
variable position relative to the center of buoyancy. One control 
input changes the mass of the stationary point and another control 
input vector corresponds to the force applied to the movable 
mass. The model describes the nonlinear coupling between the 
vehicle and the shifting and changing mass. Analysis and control 
law design is performed for the dynamics specialized to the vertical 
plane. Continuous feedback laws are developed. However, 
when energy is at a premium, we envision a scenario in which one 
might occasionally and temporarily turn off the active feedback 
control routine (including sensors), e.g., during periods of relative 
calm or when tight control is less critical. 
The model we derive, although simplified, does capture 
the essential dynamic features of underwater gliding. The 
simplicity allows for development of general control design 
strategies. These strategies along with the insights gained from 
the development are expected to be relevant to the design of 
control laws for the more complex operational gliders. Feedback 
provides robustness to uncertainty, and this uncertainty 
may include unmodeled dynamics. 
Specialization of the glider dynamics to the vertical plane 
constitutes a first step toward a systematic understanding and 
methodology for complete glider control design. In restricting 
to the vertical plane, we ignore, for example, challenges associated 
with currents traveling transverse to the motion of the vehicle. 
Analysis of tail volume requirements, heading corrections 
and the capabilities of shifting mass in this context will be next 
steps in developing methodology to meet these challenges. The 
successful SLOCUM glider experiments at LEO-15 during the 
summer of 2000 suggest promise for this program. In these experiments, 
SLOCUM performed excellent tracking in the presence 
of strong (transverse) currents. 
Throughout the paper, we illustrate our results on a model 
of a small, laboratory-scale underwater glider called ROGUE 
(Remotely Operated Gliding Underwater Experiment) that we 
have built and that we operate in a freshwater tank and pool, see 
Fig. 1. In the first version of this glider, CG position is controlled 
by shifting a lead weight inside the vehicle. In its most recent 
incarnation, ROGUE controls buoyancy and CG position 
by means of a distributed array of independently actuated ballast 
tanks (syringes). 
In related and forthcoming work with colleagues, we address 
issues in optimal path planning for underwater glidersand in 
coordinating control for multiple autonomous underwater vehicles. 
There is a great deal of literature on dynamics, stability, and 
control of airplanes, including [11], [12], [13]每[16], which is 
clearly of interest in the study of underwater gliders. We note, 
however, that added mass forces, variable buoyancy and controlled 
mass redistribution, which play a central role in our study 
of underwater gliders, are not typically relevant for airplanes and 
therefore not included in the airplane literature. 
In Section II, we derive the equations of motion for a 
buoyancy-driven, fixed-wing underwater glider. Controllability 
and observability of steady glide paths in the vertical plane are 
studied in Section III. Linear control laws are developed in 
Section IV for stabilizing these glide paths in the presence of 
disturbances. A simulation of the controlled glider modeled to 
resemble ROGUE is also presented. We give final remarks in 
Section V. 
II. GLIDER DYNAMICS 
The variables used in this paper are defined in Table I. 
A. Equations of Motion in 3-D 
We model the underwater glider as a rigid body with fixed 
wings (and tail) immersed in a fluid with buoyancy control and 
controlled internal moving mass. We take the hull to be ellipsoidal 
with wings and tail attached so that the center of buoyancy 
(CB) is at the center of the ellipsoid. We assign a coordinate 
frame fixed on the vehicle body to have its origin at the CB and 
its axes aligned with the principle axes of the ellipsoid. Let body 
axis 1 lie along the long axis of the vehicle (positive in the direction 
of the nose of the glider), let body axis 2 lie in the plane 
of the wings and body axis 3 point in the direction orthogonal 
to the wings as shown in Fig. 2. 
The total stationary mass, , (also referred to as body mass) 
is the sum of three terms: is a fixed mass that is uniformly 
distributed throughout the ellipsoid, is a fixed point mass that may 
be offset from the CB, and is the variable ballast point mass which 
is fixed in location at the CB. The vector from the CB to the point
mass is . The vector from the CB to the center of mass of the stationary mass is 
The moving internal point mass is . The vector 
describes the position of this mass with respect to the CB at time . 
The total mass of the vehicle is then 
The mass of the displaced fluid is denoted and we define 
so that the vehicle is negatively (positively) 
buoyant if is negative (positive). The different masses and 
position vectors are illustrated in Fig. 3. 
 DEFINITION OF VARIABLES 
Let denote the inertia matrix, with respect to the body 
frame, for the uniformly distributed mass . Define the operator 
so that for a vector , 
Equivalently, for vector i.e., the operator maps a vector to the (skew-symmetric) matrix 
representation of the vector cross product operator. The inertia 
matrix for the stationary (body) mass expressed with respect 
to body frame coordinates is 
Since the variable ballast mass is a point mass located at 
the CB, it does not contribute to , and in particular is a 
constant. 
The orientation of the glider is given by the rotation matrix 
. maps vectors expressed with respect to the body frame 
into inertial frame coordinates. The position of the glider 
is the vector from the origin of the inertial frame to 
the origin of the body frame (vehicle CB) as shown in Fig. 4. 
The vehicle moves through the fluid with translational velocity 
and angular velocity , expressed with respect to the body frame. [Note that we have 
diverged from the notation typical of the submarine literature 
where and . The notation that we use here is taken from texts in classical mechanics such as 
[17] and is more convenient for the derivation and analysis.] In 
this notation, the kinematics of the glider are given by 
Fig. 4. Glider position and orientation variables. 
Let  represent the total translational momentum of the 
vehicle-fluid system and  the total angular momentum of 
the system about the inertial coordinate origin, all expressed 
with respect to the inertial frame. Let represent the total 
momentum of the movable point mass with respect to the inertial frame. 
Then Newton＊s laws state that where is a unit vector pointing in the direction of gravity,
is an external force applied to the system, and is a pure
external torque. These external forces and torques include those
due to gravity and buoyancy; however, gravity is included explicitly
in the third set of equations as it is the only external
force acting on the movable point mass. The force is a
force applied from the vehicle body onto the point mass (a control
force). All vectors are expressed with respect to the inertial
frame. The vector locates the point of application of the force
with respect to the inertial coordinate frame.
Let be the momentum of the vehicle-fluid system expressed
with respect to the body frame. Let be the total
angular momentum about the origin of the body frame. Let
represent the point mass momentum with respect to the body
frame. Then
Differentiating (4)每(6) and using the kinematic expressions (2) 
and (1) gives (7) 
Substituting (3) into (7) for the rate of change of inertial momenta 
gives the following dynamic equations in body coordinates: 
 where is the internal force acting on the 
point mass in body coordinates. Let  
so that 
To derive expressions for , , and , we determine the
total kinetic energy of the glider-fluid system. The kinetic energy
of the rigid body with mass and inertia matrix is
Let be the absolute velocity of the movable point mass
expressed in body coordinates. Given that the velocity of
relative to the body frame is , we compute
The kinetic energy of the movable point mass is then computed 
to be 
Kirchhoff [18] showed that the kinetic energy of an unbounded 
volume of ideal fluid due to the motion of an immersed 
rigid body takes the form where is the added mass matrix, is the added inertia 
matrix, and is the added cross term. These matrices depend 
upon the external shape of the body and the density of the fluid. 
This form of kinetic energy comes from a potential flow solution 
in which the fluid is assumed to be inviscid, incompressible, 
irrotational and motionless at infinity. We incorporate viscous 
effects into the model as external forces and torques (lift and 
drag) below. 
We assume that at low angle of attack, the contribution of the 
wings is dominated by lift and drag forces. Thus, we make the 
simplifying assumption that the added mass and inertia terms 
can be computed solely from the vehicle hull. These assumptions 
are not so critical for the analysis in this paper, especially 
since it is expected that feedback control will provide robustness 
to unmodeled dynamics. Nonetheless, it may be of interest in 
future work to consider more detailed modeling of added mass 
associated with the hull plus wings using methods such as from 
computational fluid dynamics. 
The total vehicle fluid kinetic energy is 
computed to be 
We can then compute momenta as
Since the vehicle hull is ellipsoidal (we neglect the wings in this 
instance), and are diagonal and . Let and . Define 
Inverting the relationships (13) then gives the body velocities in 
terms of the body momenta: 
where is the 3 3 identity matrix. Let and . Furthermore, assume that so that. 
Then,Inverting the relationships (13) then gives the body velocities in
terms of the body momenta: 
To get the equations of motion in terms of body velocities, we 
differentiate (14) with respect to time. We assume that buoyancy 
is changed in a symmetric way (e.g., ballast is pumped on and 
off board in streams with the appropriate symmetry) so that there 
is negligible associated thrust or moment on the glider. Let the 
ballast control input be defined as 
Differentiating (14) then gives 
where 
With the substitution into (16) of (8)每(11) for the derivatives 
, and , (17) for and (13) for the relationship between 
momenta and velocity, the complete equations of motion 
for the underwater glider moving in three-dimensional space are  
Here, 
refer to external forces and moments, in this case lift and drag, 
with respect to the body frame. 
B. Equations of Motion in the Vertical Plane 
We now specialize the model to the vertical plane, the 每 
plane in inertial coordinates and the 每 plane in body coordinates. 
Accordingly, 
where is pitch angle. 
The equations of motion (18) for the gliding vehicle restricted 
to the vertical plane become 
Here, is the angle of attack, is drag, is lift and is the 
viscous moment as shown in Fig. 5. These forces and moment 
are modeled as 
where the s are constant coefficients. This model is a standard 
one, derived using airfoil theory and potential flow calculations 
and then verified using experimental observations, see for example 
[12]. The method for determination of the coefficients 
is described in Section III-C. 
As shown in Fig. 5, we denote the glide path angle by where 
Fig. 5. Lift and drag on glider. 
Fig. 6. Planar gliding controlled to a line. 
We also denote the glider speed by where 
We also denote the glider speed by where
We will typically specify a glide path by desired glide path angle 
and desired speed . We define inertial coordinates 
such that coincides with the desired path: 
Then, measures the vehicle＊s perpendicular distance to the 
desired path. We define two gliding objectives: 
GO1 
The objective is to control only the direction and speed 
of the vehicle＊s glide path. In this case we need not 
consider and at all. 
GO2 
The objective is to control gliding along a prescribed 
line (see Fig. 6). In this case we will include (but 
exclude ) in our analysis and we aim to make . 
The dynamics of the state are 
In the above model, the movable point mass can be controlled 
in all directions (2 degrees of freedom in the planar case). However, 
it may sometimes be the case that control over the CG location 
is restricted, for example, a battery may be shifted in a 
limited way. For the planar case, this might translate into a movable 
point mass with only one degree of freedom. To model this 
we consider the case in which is fixed ( ), i.e., we 
can only move the point mass in the direction.then 
The new equations of motion are (19)每(29) excluding (26) and
(28). Further, is replaced by (32) and is replaced by
which is computed by differentiating (32) with respect to time.
In particular, (22) and (24) are replaced with 
where 
III. CONTROLLABILITY OF STEADY GLIDE PATHS 
In this section, we compute steady glide paths. We then study 
controllability and observability of these glide paths.  
A. Gliding Equilibria 
We prescribe a desired glide path by specifying the desired 
, we see that we must choose glide path angle and the desired speed 
. We denote with subscript ※ § the value of all dynamic variables at 
the glide equilibria. 
To get the conditions for such planar gliding equilibria, 
we set the left hand side of (31) and (21)每(29) to zero. This gives 
or 
and . Note that 
which are all dependent on the equilibrium value of the variable
mass .
Since the drag model is valid only at small angles of attack, we 
take 
Given , (35) and (36) may be solved for . We can then
compute
can then be solved again using (35) and (36). Finally, (34)
gives a one-parameter family of solutions for .
First, we compute from (35) and (36). Note that these
equations reduce to
The first equation of (39) is a quadratic equation in . Provided
and , we have
Equation (40) may be solved for a realizable provided
Evaluating (41) for permissible values of in the range
, we see that we must choose
or
Since the drag model is valid only at small angles of attack, we
take as the solution of (41) with smaller magnitude,
If , then we simply have
For a vehicle which is symmetric about the body 每 plane, 
which are all dependent on the equilibrium value of the variable 
. In this case, for equilibria corresponding to vertical . flight ( ), 
the desired angle of attack is zero. 
Fig. 7. Family of possible movable mass locations for a steady glide. 
We may determine from the latter equation in (39) as 
Finally, we may solve for a one-parameter family of sliding mass locations 
solutions is which satisfy (34). The family of 
where 
and where is a real number. The vector is a particular solution 
of (34). Since is the direction of gravity in body coordinates, 
is orthogonal to the direction of gravity and measures the vehicle＊s ※bottom-heaviness§ as 
shown in Fig. 7.
 For an experimental vehicle, may be a more physically 
relevant choice of parameter than . In this case, 
for a given value of the parameter , provided . 
If , there is an equilibrium of the desired form if and 
If (47) is satisfied, 
is a free parameter. In fact, we should not choose 
to satisfy condition (47) in general because this 
will require that be small. Since contributes to the vehicle＊s 
※bottom-heaviness§ at shallower glide path angles, satisfying 
condition (47) will affect stability of these other equilibria. 
[For a vehicle symmetric about the body 每 plane, 
implies that and . In this case, condition (47) requires that .] 
B. Linearization 
We determine the linearization for the planar glider about a 
steady glide path. 
Let and let . Define 
Then the linearized system is 
(48) where and 
are defined as shown in (49) and (50), shown at 
the bottom of the next page. Here, 
where we have abbreviated as , etc., and
The notation indicates that the quantity is to be evaluated 
at the desired equilibrium. 
This linearization can be used to check features of a given 
vehicle design, e.g., to check stability or controllability of a desired 
glide path given a choice of vehicle design parameters. 
One can also use this linearization to help automate the design 
procedure. For example, consider a vehicle that has been fully 
designed but for a choice of the position of the movable mass 
for a given glide path. Application of the Routh criterion to the 
characteristic polynomial of the matrix gives conditions for 
stability of the glide path. These conditions can be written in 
terms of the free variable. would then be chosen for behavior 
with desired stability and would then be computed according to (46). 
C. Controllability and Observability 
In this section we describe controllability and observability 
of steady glide paths for a model of our experimental vehicle 
ROGUE. ROGUE has an ellipsoidal body with axes of length 
18, 12, and 6 in. The wings are symmetric airfoils from [21] for 
low Reynolds number. We note that the body and wings have not 
been designed for optimal gliding performance but rather in consideration 
of available facilities and other manufacturing constraints. 
Each wing has span of 28 inches with aspect ratio 9.3. 
The glider body, wings and tail are all machined from UHMW 
(ultra-high molecular weight) plastic. Mass and inertia properties 
were measured directly. Added mass and inertia properties 
can be found, for example, in [20]. Lift and drag for the body 
were found experimentally as described in [8]. Lift and drag for 
the wings were taken from the data in [19]. Lift for the body 
plus wings was then computed using Schrenk＊s method [21], 
and drag was computed as the sum of the drag on the wing and 
the body. The lift moment was approximated by taking into account 
the tail. The vehicle model parameters are given as follows: 
The first three masses, , , and were measured with a high 
degree of accuracy. The other terms have less precision because 
they are based on look up tables and approximation methods. 
Four steady glide paths are calculated using the method of 
Section III-A. The glide paths are at glide angles 30 , 45 , 
30 and 45 . We compute the glide path at 30 by choosing 
a desired glide speed m/s and a desired vertical location 
of the movable mass given by cm. This results 
in an equilibrium variable mass given by kg. The 
glide path at 45 is computed for these same values of 
and . The corresponding equilibrium speed for this glide is 
computed as m/s. Similarly, we computed the two steady upward glide paths, for 
the same value of and the same buoyant force magnitude, i.e., the value of is held 
constant. Recall that is the mass of the vehicle less the mass of the displaced fluid . 
The full description of each of the four glide paths is given in Table II. 
Local properties of these steady glide paths can be studied 
using the linearization of Section III-B. By plugging in the equilibrium 
values, we can examine the linearization for stability, 
controllability and observability. The four glide paths listed in 
Table II all have a relatively slow unstable mode. They are all, 
however, locally controllable. That is, and as given by (49) 
and (50), when evaluated at any of the four equilibria, satisfy 
the controllability rank condition. Note that the linearization includes 
the state meaning that controllability extends to the 
variable . Accordingly, we can successfully design a linear 
controller that will locally accomplish not only glide objective 
GO1 but also GO2. 
It is of interest to check the controllability rank condition in 
the case that the movable mass can only move in one direction 
(i.e., is fixed). To do this we have linearized the equations of 
motion for the single degree-of-freedom moving mass described 
at the very end of Section II. Again the new and matrices 
for this case, when evaluated at any of the above four glide paths, 
satisfy the controllability rank condition. Thus, it seems that at 
least for linear type control action, not much is lost in restricting 
the degrees of freedom of the movable mass from two to one. 
On the other hand, for large motions, such as switching from 
an upward to a downward glide path, care needs to be taken 
if restricting the degrees of freedom of the movable mass. For 
instance, while motion of the movable mass restricted to the 
direction would be sufficient for sawtooth maneuvers, motion 
restricted to the direction would not allow for both upward 
and downward glide motions. Because of the glider shape, mass 
motion restricted to the direction will also typically have 
more limited travel as compared to motion in the direction. 
The movable mass for ROGUE is approximately 1/6 of the 
vehicle displacement . This is of the same relative order as the 
movable mass in the gliders SLOCUM, Spray and Seaglider. 
Variations in this mass or its location will not in principle affect 
local controllability of a feasible glide path. In practice, however, 
there are clear tradeoffs associated with moving a large 
mass a short distance versus moving a small mass a large distance. 
For example, a large mass may be energetically expensive 
to move and the necessary motion control resolution required 
may be difficult to achieve. On the other hand, since only short 
travel would be required, there would be a smaller demand on 
vehicle volume. Variation in mass and location will also affect 
the range of feasible glide paths and the nature of the switching 
between them. The variable mass in ROGUE at the equilibrium 
described above is larger relative to vehicle displacement 
as compared to these other gliders. This mass controls glide 
speed; thus, for example, if significant vehicle load required designing 
for a smaller variable mass then maximum glide speed 
would be reduced. 
Observability of the linearized model about the four glide 
paths listed in Table II was also investigated. If GO1 is our objective, 
i.e., if we are interested in controlling only the direction 
and speed of the vehicle＊s glide path, then we need not measure 
. The nine-dimensional dynamic model (which excludes ) is completely observable 
with measurements limited to movable mass position ,and variable mass. In this case, 
pitch angle , pitch rate , linear velocity components and 
and the momentum of the movable mass, need not be 
sensed. Observability means that with the measurements of, 
and , a dynamic observer could be designed to give an estimate 
of the unmeasured states , , , , and .of course, is typically already measured and 
is not so hard to measure, so the real advantage is in the estimation of ,, 
and which are more difficult to measure. The nine-dimensional 
dynamic model is also completely observable with measurements 
limited to , (or ) and . Again this means that using these three measurement signals,
an observer could be designed to estimate the rest of the states. 
If GO2 is our objective, i.e., if we want to control the glider to 
a prescribed line in the plane, then we need a measurement of . 
Recall from (30) that depends on both depth , which is easily 
measured, and horizontal position , which is not so easily measured. 
The measurements , and , together with a measurement of (or alternatively , , and ), 
do not render observable. This means that without an initial condition measurement 
, the trajectory can not be computed. However, with an initial measurement of 
given say from a GPS fix taken when the glider is at the surface, the horizontal motion of 
the glider can be calculated, for example, by making use of the 
estimate of linear velocity from the observer. We note that this 
approach has the potential to improve the accuracy of horizontal 
motion determination over current methods which are based on 
assumptions of constant angle of attack, etc. For example, on 
SLOCUM, the horizontal motion of the glider during the glide 
is estimated from GPS fixes taken at the surface, measured pitch 
angle , an assumed angle of attack and vertical speed computed 
from depth measurements [6]. Similarly, on Spray, horizontal 
flight distance is calculated based on a constant pitch, heading 
and angle of attack to which the vehicle is being controlled [4]. 
IV. CONTROLLED PLANAR GLIDING 
In this section we demonstrate, in simulation, controlled 
gliding in the vertical plane by designing and testing a linear 
controller for the glide path moving 30 downward as described 
in Table II. Since the controller is linear, we expect that it 
should take initial conditions nearby to the 30 downward glide 
path. We demonstrate this result by starting the glider at the 
45 downward steady glide and using the linear controller to 
move it to the 30 downward glide solely by feedback. 
The controller is designed for the linearization about the 30 
downward glide using the LQR (linear quadratic regulator) 
method. This is a standard linear optimal control design method 
which produces a stabilizing control law that minimizes a cost 
function that is a weighted sum of the squares of the states and 
input variables. We assume that all of the states are available for 
feedback. If this were not the case, then, as described above, it 
is possible to design an estimator to determine the unmeasured 
states.
 The cost function to be minimized is defined as 
where and are state and control penalty matrices. and 
were chosen to ensure well-behaved dynamics and to prevent 
large motions in the movable mass position and variable mass 
that would exceed physical limitations. Taking into account real 
or desirable maximum state values, the states associated with 
vehicle and movable mass velocity and variable mass and pitch 
angle were weighted most heavily. No significant tuning was 
performed. The weight selections are given by 
The corresponding control law is where is computed
using MATLAB as the solution to the Riccati equation
given .
 In Figs. 8每10, we show a MATLAB simulation of the glider 
moving first along the 45 downward glide and then switching 
to the 30 downward glide path. This was accomplished by 
turning on the linear controller at seconds. In Fig. 8 we 
show the glide path, in Fig. 9 we show plots of position, pitch, 
linear and angular velocity as a function of time and in Fig. 10 
we show the position of the movable mass, the net buoyant force 
as well as the control inputs as a function of time. In these latter 
two figures we show the results of the controller as applied to 
the linear dynamic model and the results as applied to the nonlinear 
dynamic model. 
The figures show that the 45 downward glide path is in the 
region of attraction of the linear controller designed for the 30 
downward glide path. Furthermore, the transient is very well 
behaved. 
However, we do not expect that the upward equilibria would 
be in the region of attraction of a linear controller designed for 
a downward glide (and vice-versa). This means we would not 
want to use a pure linear feedback solution for switching in a 
sawtooth glide path. Instead, we could consider complementing 
the feedback law with a feedforward term which drives the movable 
mass and the variable mass in a predetermined way from 
initial to final condition. Alternatively, we can consider a nonlinear 
control design approach that would include feedback and 
may or may not include a feedforward term. A feedforward term 
would make it possible to introduce an optimal path between 
two different glides. 
Laboratory experiments of controlled gliding with ROGUE 
will be described in a future publication. 
V. FINAL REMARKS 
We plan to realize the results described in this paper as well 
as future control design developments on experimental gliders 
both of our own construction, e.g., ROGUE, and with our colleagues 
who build sea-worthy gliders, e.g., SLOCUM. 
Fig. 10. Simulation of movable mass, variable mass, and control inputs. 
In future work we intend to further develop the gliding control 
methodology by investigating nonlinear feedback control laws, 
feedforward control and path planning. We are already working 
with colleagues on optimal control theory that is applicable to 
underwater gliders [7] and that may be useful for path planning 
purposes. 
Other future directions include extending our work to gliding 
motion in the horizontal plane, e.g., waypoint following, and to 
glider network maneuvers. Work is already underway to develop 
decentralized control laws to produce underwater vehicles that 
school [9], [10], and these we hope to integrate with control of 
glider dynamics. In support of this effort, we are building an 
experimental, underwater test-bed for multiple-vehicle control 
[22]. Schooling fish function like an integrated sensing system 
and by emulating their traffic rules, we can hope to produce a 
network of gliders that can similarly serve as a fast and effective 
adaptive ocean sensing platform. 