Title:
Defning active, inactive, and extinct sea?oor massive sulfde deposits

Author:
J.W. Jamieson, A. Gartman

Abstract
Hydrothermal activity results in the formation of hydrothermal mineral deposits, including sea?oor massive
sulfde deposits, at oceanic spreading ridges, arcs, and back-arcs. As hydrothermal systems age, the mineral
deposits eventually become severed from the heat source and ?uid-?ow pathways responsible for their formation
and become extinct. The timescales and processes by which this cessation of activity occurs, and the resultant
distinction between hydrothermally active and inactive deposits has recently taken on policy implications related
to the potential issuance of exploitation leases for sea?oor massive sulfde deposits by the International Seabed
Authority in Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction. Here, we discuss the scientifc rationale behind designating
hydrothermal systems as active, inactive, or extinct, with the aim of applying a scientifc underpinning to
ongoing policy discussions, which often lack a common set of criteria and use the same descriptions for opposing
phenomena. We apply the simple defnition that active vent felds currently exhibit ?uid ?ow above ambient
seawater temperatures, inactive vent felds are not currently exhibiting ?uid ?ow but may potentially become
active again, and extinct vent felds are not expected to become active again. We suggest these terms can only be
correctly applied at the vent feld scale and defne a vent feld as a geologically continuous entity that may
include both actively and formerly venting hydrothermal deposits. Finally, we propose criteria and techniques
for determining activity and reasonably bounding the extent of a vent feld for classifcation purposes.

Introduction
Hydrothermal vents are sites of ?uid discharge on the sea?oor that
occur along or associated with submarine tectonic boundaries such as
mid-ocean ridges and subduction zones. In these geological settings,
magmatic heat sources beneath the sea?oor drive convective circulation
of hydrothermal ?uids along permeable pathways in the crust such as
faults and fssures (Fig. 1) [1]. If the hydrothermal vents are discharging
high-temperature (>~250 ?C), metal- and sulfur-rich ?uids, a sea?oor
massive sulfde (SMS) deposit may develop over time on and/or
immediately below the sea?oor from the precipitation and accumulation of metal-rich minerals that precipitate from the ?uid when it mixes
with cold seawater [1,2]. In rare places, where these
geologically-favorable conditions persist for an extended period of time,
these deposits can grow to be large enough and contain high enough
concentrations of Cu, Zn, Au, and/or Ag to be potentially economically
viable sources for these metals and targets for the emergent industry of
deep-seabed mining [3,4]. Eventually, hydrothermal ?uid venting at
any given site will cease, and the site will become hydrothermally
inactive and ultimately extinct. Currently, very little information is
available for inactive or extinct SMS deposits. InterRidge maintains an
online ※Vents Database§ of all known and inferred hydrothermal systems discovered to date [5]. The current version (v. 3.4) contains 707
individual records of ※submarine hydrothermal activity§, with only 54
of these records listed as ※inactive§. The paucity of documented inactive
sites is largely because inactive deposits are diffcult to fnd as they do
not have an associated hydrothermal plume, the detection of which is
the primary exploration tool for SMS deposits [6]. The scientifc focus on
active hydrothermal vent sites, which host unique chemosynthetic taxa
and which are locations of scientifc interest beyond the economic interest driving SMS exploration further contributes to the low number of
known inactive sites [7每9]. However, there is an increasing focus on
inactive SMS deposits driven by the possibility of marine mining.
In Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction (ABNJ), any mining of SMS
deposits (also referred to as polymetallic sulfde deposits) will be
managed by the International Seabed Authority (ISA). As the ISA moves
closer toward fnalizing exploitation regulations for mining in ABNJ,
discussion of environmental considerations, including what
environmental protections are needed, has been a key component. A ban
on mining of active SMS deposits has been suggested by parts of the
scientifc community, due to the minimal areas of the sea?oor these
vents occupy, their scientifc value, and low estimations of their resource
potential [10每12]. This has been followed by assertions that mining of
active hydrothermal vents would likely take place in a limited manner, if
at all, and that inactive deposits will be the main target of this emergent
industry [13]. However, all current ISA exploration contracts include
areas of active hydrothermal venting and, while only a fraction of each
10,000 km2 exploration area will be subject to exploitation, a workable
defnition for active hydrothermal vents in a manner that could be legally applicable for mining regulations does not currently exist. Here we
propose a classifcation similar to that used for volcanoes, which uses the
designations active, inactive (dormant), and extinct. We consider how this
classifcation can be reasonably applied to hydrothermal systems and
associated SMS deposits, in order to ensure a consistent and meaningful
geologic framework for the evolving regulations. Known active hydrothermal systems are diverse, and many do not result in SMS formation.
Here we discuss those associated with high-temperature sub-sea?oor
?uid circulation that has the potential to mobilize and deposit base and
precious metals as sulfde minerals (e.g., temperatures above 250 ?C)
[14]. We specifcally do not include systems that would not result in SMS
formation, and so exclude low-temperature, low-?ux systems associated
with off-axis areas and seamounts.

Method
2. Terminology
For clarity, we use the following terminology when referencing hydrothermal mineral accumulations on the sea?oor at different scales
(Table 1). Focused sources of high temperature hydrothermal venting
typically emanate from chimneys, or individual, in places interlinked,
vertical pipe-like mineral accumulations that have one or more orifces.
Hydrothermal edifces or mounds are larger structures that form from the
progressive accumulation of hydrothermal material on the sea?oor at
vent sites. Edifces and mounds are defned by their morphology, with
edifces generally having steeper sides, and mounds having a distinct
conical shape. Both structures may host chimneys. The spatial clustering
of chimneys, edifces, and/or mounds on the sea?oor defne a vent feld,
which describes a discrete region that contains hydrothermal accumulations distributed over an area with dimensions that can vary from 10s
to 1,000s of meters (Table 1).
When referring to sea?oor hydrothermal deposits as a resource, we
use well-established language typically used by the land-based mineral
resource sector (Table 2) [15]. If a sea?oor hydrothermal site contains a
spatially continuous accumulation of hydrothermal material of large
enough size to be potentially mineable (i.e. a large edifce or mound), it
is referred to as a deposit (e.g., the Solwara I deposit, in the Manus Basin)
[16,17]. An SMS deposit refers to a subset of hydrothermal deposits that
is composed dominantly of metal sulfde minerals (e.g., pyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite; note that the term massive in sea?oor massive sulfde is
a mineralogical textural term to indicate a mass abundance of sulfde
minerals of >~60% and is not a reference to deposit size) [18]. Therefore, the term SMS deposit should be applied only to large accumulations
of hydrothermal minerals (deposits) that are known from sampling or
other methods to be composed largely of massive sulfde material. In
other words, although every SMS deposit is a hydrothermal deposit, not
every hydrothermal deposit is necessarily an SMS deposit. Petersen et al.
[4] estimated that, at probable minimum ore grades (e.g., ~5 wt% Cu,
15 wt% Zn, 5 ppm Au), an SMS deposit would have to be at least 2 Mt to
be an economically viable target for mining. This would correspond to a
massive sulfde mound with a basal diameter of approximately 200 m
and height of 60 m, similar to the active TAG mound [19]. Using these
defnitions, a vent feld may contain no deposits, a single deposit, or
several deposits, some or all of which may or may not be SMS deposits.
Volcanoes are informally classifed as active, dormant, or extinct, where
an active volcano has erupted in the past ~10,000 years, a dormant
volcano has not erupted in the past 10,000 years, but is expected to erupt
again, and an extinct volcano has not erupted in the past 10,000 years,
and is not expected to erupt again [20]. This classifcation can serve as a
guide for the activity of vents felds, where active felds will contain
hydrothermal venting at temperatures above ambient seawater, inactive
vent felds lack apparent activity but were recently active, remain near a
heat source, and have the potential to become active again, and venting
is unlikely to resume at extinct vent felds. The classifcation of a volcano
as dormant, rather than extinct, is normally due to the presence of indicators of heat and/or magmatic activity in the subsurface, such as
seismic events within the volcano, elevated heat ?ow, or presence of
fumaroles. Several examples of the eruption of an ※extinct§ volcano (eg., Fourpeaked Volcano, Alaska) point to the lack of certainty associated
with this informal classifcation, associated with an evolving understanding regarding deep-Earth processes. Likewise, the classifcation of a
vent feld as extinct should not be considered an absolute certainty, but
instead a low probability that hydrothermal venting will reactivate in
the future.

Result
3. Indicators of hydrothermal activity
Defning an individual hydrothermal vent, deposit or vent feld as
active is conceptually simple enough: it is hydrothermally active when
?uid with a temperature above that of ambient bottom water is venting
from the sea?oor. Hydrothermal plume surveys use CTD (Conductivity,
Temperature and Depth) casts that also include optical sensors
(turbidity) and sensors for chemical anomalies (e.g., salinity, Eh, CH4)
associated with the hydrothermal plume in the water column above and
down-current from an active vent site, at distances of up to 100s of kilometers away from their source [6]. Collecting seawater on CTD casts
also allows for the detection of 3He, an unambiguous tracer of hydrothermal activity. Once a plume is detected, the hydrothermal site is
typically visually located using a camera tow or cameras on a Remotely
Operated Vehicle (ROV) or Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV).
Visual signs of venting may be obvious, with vigorous discharge of
high-temperature black or white smoker ?uid, often from multiple vents
(Fig. 2A). Subsurface mixing of ascending hydrothermal ?uid with local
seawater prior to venting also typically occurs, and results in cooler,
diffuse-?ow ?uids that may be shimmering due to temperature and
salinity differences relative to seawater. Both ※focused ?ow§ and
※diffuse ?ow§ styles comprise active hydrothermal venting.
Even when venting is not visibly obvious, the presence of live hydrothermal vent-endemic species is another clear indicator of active
venting. Vent biota have a tendency to colonize even the most diffusely
venting, low-temperature sites, and, due to the vivid colors these organisms may display against a dull sea?oor substrate, can be a particularly effective indicator of hydrothermal activity when ?uid ?uxes
and/or venting temperatures are low (Fig. 2B).
On sites that have been sampled by dredge and therefore lack visual
information regarding sea?oor context, the presence of anhydride
(CaSO4) can be used as a mineralogical indicator of recent hightemperature hydrothermal activity and indicates that the site may still
be active. Anhydrite precipitates when Ca-rich hydrothermal ?uids mix
with and/or heats up Ca- and SO4-rich seawater at temperatures of
above ~150 ?C [21]. However, anhydride has retrograde solubility, and
will dissolve back into seawater when it is no longer exposed to elevated
temperatures. The rate of anhydride dissolution is not well constrained,
and it is therefore not known for how long anhydride remains as a
mineral phase within cold vent deposits. However, surfcial areas of old,
inactive or extinct deposits will not contain anhydride, although it may
remain in areas not in contact with seawater (e.g., at depth) as it is found
occasionally in volcanogenic massive sulfde deposits (VMS, i.e. the
ancient equivalent of SMS deposits) [22].
4. Indicators of hydrothermal inactivity
There are several sea?oor observations that indicate prolonged hydrothermal inactivity at a deposit or vent feld and can therefore be
important criteria for distinguishing inactive sites from extinct sites.
Over long time periods (e.g., 1000s of years) it is likely that inactive
chimneys will eventually collapse. The oldest known vent felds (e.g.,
>40,000 years old) are characterized by a notable lack of upright
chimney structures, and instead are composed primarily of low-relief
mounds (e.g., Peterburgskoe and Semyenov IV on the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge) [23每25]. Chimney collapse occurs due to increasing structural
instability as chimneys grow taller, the dissolution of thermodynamically unstable minerals in seawater, and because most hydrothermal
systems occur in seismically active areas where ground motion can lead
to collapse. However, timescales for chimney collapse may vary for
different deposits according to tectonic and oceanographic setting (i.e.
intensity and frequency of seismic activity; temperature and dissolved
oxygen content in bottom waters), and the mineralogy and morphology
of the deposits.
Oxidation of sulfde minerals within hydrothermal deposits indicates
exposure to seawater. Oxidation begins as soon as the minerals are in
contact with oxygenated seawater and thus oxidation occurs even during periods of active venting. Likewise, the dissolution of anhydride
begins once the precipitated mineral is no longer hot, and therefore
dissolution can occur on cooler parts of otherwise high-temperature vent
structures. Prolonged periods of exposure to ambient, low temperature
seawater can lead to substantial oxidation of sulfde minerals and anhydride dissolution, and both processes may be considered qualitative
indicators of deposit aging, with the important caveat that these transformations do not a priori indicate inactivity. However, over long time
periods loss of these minerals may fundamentally reshape hydrothermal
deposits.
Inactive vents display an absence of chemosynthetic fauna and, if
they have been inactive for long enough, will often host deep-sea slow
growing sessile taxa such as sponges and corals (Fig. 2C). For a more
detailed description of biological indications of activity and inactivity
see Van Dover [26].
When applied independently, the indicators of inactivity described
above (lack of upright chimneys, extensive oxidation, and lack of vent
biological communities) may not necessarily be diagnostic for classifcation of inactivity on their own. However, taken together, these observations provide a reliable, unambiguous indication of prolonged
hydrothermal inactivity.
5. Defning hydrothermal activity at the vent feld scale
Although hydrothermal inactivity may be described at the scale of
individual vents or deposits using the criteria in the preceding section,
defning a vent feld as active, inactive, or extinct is much more complex
because we do not yet fully understand the spatial scale of hydrothermal
circulation cells in the sub-sea?oor. A vent feld is generally described as
a cluster of hydrothermal vents or deposits on the sea?oor. The size,
morphology, and distribution of hydrothermal deposits that make up a
vent feld can vary signifcantly, largely according to tectonic environment, making a simple defnition based on deposit size or footprint
impractical [2]. We use the concept of geological connectivity to defne
the extents of individual vent felds based on a common magmatic heat
source and subsea?oor permeability structure, such as normal faults or
detachment faults associated with rifting along mid-ocean ridges, or ring
faults associated with caldera collapse within arc volcanoes [27每29].
Using this defnition, any spatially associated currently or formerly
active vent sites and associated chimneys, edifces and/or mounds that
are geologically connected would be considered part of a single vent
feld. Each vent feld would be subject to a single classifcation of activity
that would apply to the entire feld, and any active vent feld may
contain more than one hydrothermal circulation cell. The evaluation of
geological connectivity at a specifc site would be possible by interpretation of geological features on the sea?oor (e.g., faults, volcanic centers) identifed through ship-based and high-resolution bathymetric
mapping (e.g., ~40 m and 1 m resolution, respectively). These datasets
would commonly be generated as part of any exploration and resource
evaluation program.
The Endeavour Segment of the Juan de Fuca mid-ocean ridge provides an illustrative example of defning the limits of individual vent
felds using the concept of geological connectivity. The Endeavour
Segment is described as containing fve major active vent felds that
occur along 15 km of the ridge axial valley, each separated by 1.5每2 km,
with several smaller felds, and other sites of diffuse venting occurring
near or between the major active felds (Fig. 3A) [30]. However, this
current clustering of active venting represents only a present-day
snapshot of the evolution of hydrothermal circulation along this 15 km
length of ridge segment. This stretch of ridge axis also contains over 400
inactive chimneys, edifces and mounds that occur outside of the active
vent felds and record over 3000 years of spatially and temporally dynamic venting at Endeavour (Fig. 3A) [31,32]. Seismic imaging along
the ridge axis reveals that this venting was, and continues to be, driven
by a continuous axial magma chamber beneath the ridge segment [33].
The vents occur in close proximity to the along-axis normal faults that
defne the axial valley and are likely an important control on subsurface
permeability and hydrothermal ?uid ?ow. Thus, although the active
vent clusters each likely represent currently discrete hydrothermal circulation cells, the entire 15 km length of axial valley represents a
geologically continuous zone of present or recent hydrothermal venting,
driven by a common heat source and structurally controlled permeability regime. Endeavour should therefore be considered as a single
continuous vent feld, and, consequently, since parts of Endeavour are
hydrothermally active, the entire 15 km long vent feld should be
considered active.
The fve Semyenov vent felds associated with the 13?30＊ oceanic
core complex on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge provide a contrasting example
to Endeavour. Semyenov 1-5 are roughly equally spaced along the axis
of the core complex (Fig. 3B) [34]. Apart from Semyenov 3 and 5, which
are closely spaced and are geologically similar, these vent felds have
different morphologies, compositions, and local tectonic controls and
substrates. All vent felds are separated by stretches of substrate that
show no indication of past hydrothermal activity. Here, it is appropriate
that each vent feld be considered as separate from the others, and
individually classifed as active, inactive, or extinct, as there is no
indication of geological continuity between the fve Semyenov felds
(again, except for Semyenov 3 and 5, which should be grouped
together). Based on extensive plume surveys and several ROV dives,
only Semyenov 2 is known to be active, and Semyenov 1, 3, 4, and 5
appear to be extinct [35,36].
The TAG hydrothermal feld presents a more challenging case study.
The hydrothermal mounds that defne the TAG feld are distributed over
a ~8 km2 area on the eastern edge of the axial valley (Fig. 3C) [38].
Some of the mounds coalesce with adjacent mounds (e.g. Double
Mound) or are directly next to each other (e.g., Shinkai Mound and New
Mounds #2 and #3; Southern Mound and Rona Mound). Other mounds
appear to be isolated deposits more than a kilometer away from other
known mounds (e.g., Mir Zone, active TAG Mound, and Shimmering
Mound). The TAG feld has been used as a case study for the exploration
for inactive deposits and understanding their physical and chemical
evolution [37]. With the exception of the active mound, which is
vigorously venting black smoker ?uids, the mounds display characteristics of inactive deposits, including lack of venting or vent-related
macrofauna, partial burial by sediments, paucity of upright chimney
structures, partial dismemberment by faulting, and internal collapse,
and Southern, Shinkai, and New Mounds have been described as ※eSMS§
(extinct SMS) [37]. However, at Southern Mound, the presence of bacterial mats suggests that diffuse, low-temperature venting is occurring
(Fig. 2B). The Shinkai and New Mounds lack evidence of bacterial mats,
but host abundant upright chimney spires and do not display internal
collapse features that characterize many of the other mounds. The lack
of collapse features is interpreted to indicate that anhydride dissolution
has yet to occur and heat is still retained within these mounds, suggesting that these mounds have only recently become inactive [37].
Radioisotope dating of hydrothermal precipitates indicate that large
deposits form on the order of 1,000s to 100,000 s years [32,39每41].
Evidence from radioisotope dating of the active mound at TAG indicates
that hydrothermal activity is cyclical, with prolonged periods of activity
and inactivity [39], suggesting that, using the defnitions proposed here,
Shinkai and New Mounds may not be extinct but only currently inactive,
whereas Southern Mound appears to be active. Overall, the cluster of
mounds that defne the TAG feld are interpreted to have formed
through hydrothermal circulation driven by a common ridge axis heat
source and channeling of ?uid along a common subsea?oor detachment
fault system [42,43]. Based on this interpretation, the entire vent feld
should therefore be classifed as hydrothermally active, as the individual
mounds are linked by the same underlying hydrothermal permeability
structure.
The examples from Endeavour and TAG provide evidence that,
although individual chimneys can in places be stable on decadal timescales, this is not universally true, and hydrothermal venting can be
spatially variable over the lifespan of a vent feld. Results from deepdrilling projects reveal that, in some places, drilling into the sea?oor
adjacent to an active black smoker does not intersect the system and
results in no change to ?uid ?ow in the active smoker. Drilling by ODP
leg 169 at Escanaba Trough, a sediment covered spreading center,
resulted in no intersection of hydrothermal ?ow nor changes to the
adjacent active vent, less than 10 m from the drill site (Fig. 4A) [45,46].
In other places, however, drilling resulted in the creation of a new black
smoker. In the Iheya North hydrothermal feld, in the Okinawa Trough,
for example, drilling adjacent to active hydrothermal vents during IODP
Expedition 331 resulted in the formation of artifcial, active hydrothermal vents, some of which persisted for more than 40 months and
resulted in rapid hydrothermal chimney growth (Fig. 4B) [47]. Similar
creation of artifcial hydrothermal vents and associated chimneys were
also reported during ODP Legs 139 and 169 at Middle Valley on the Juan
de Fuca (Fig. 4C) [48,49]. At Iheya North, the ?uids discharging from
these artifcial vents were higher salinity than those forming the natural
hydrothermal vents in the region prior to drilling, as a result of segregation of high and low salinity ?uids in the subsea?oor, with only low
salinity ?uids venting in the absence of drilling [50]. This demonstrates
that sea?oor penetration in an active region may release not only ?uids
that are currently venting in other parts of the vent feld but may connect
with existing subsurface ?uid reservoirs that are currently not venting.
Given our current understanding of subsurface ?uid ?ow, the dynamic
and unpredictable nature of hydrothermal systems indicates that drilling
into an inactive deposit in an overall active vent feld has the potential to
initiate ?uid ?ow.
6. Global inventory of inactive SMS deposits
The InterRidge Vents Database is a researcher-driven compilation
that aims to provide an international standard for documentation of all
sites of submarine hydrothermal activity and includes both hightemperature ※black smoker§ ore-forming systems discussed here, and
low-temperature systems associated with seamounts and fracture zones.
Only 8% of the sites documented in the InterRidge database are classifed as inactive [5]. Of the 54 sites classifed as inactive, 36 are
low-temperature systems that occur on seamounts (e.g., Brown Bear
Seamount; Dellwood Seamount), Fe- or Mn-oxide deposits (e.g., Carlsberg Ridge, 1.67 S; Shikurose Bank), or disseminated sulfdes in quartz
veins in exposed crustal rocks (e.g., DSDP Hole 504B; Vema Fracture
Zone) and are not considered high-temperature, ore-forming systems
comparable to systems that could generate an SMS deposit and so are not
considered here. Of the remaining 19 ※inactive§ sites, one site
(Zenith-Victory, Mid-Atlantic Ridge) should be classifed as active due to
a report of a hydrothermal plume at this location [23]. Another ※inactive§ site from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, Ashadze 4, is also not considered
because the only published description of this site is a report of an
inactive sulfde boulder with a maximum dimension of about 1 m that
was observed and sampled during an ROV transect ~1.5 km downslope
from the active Ashadze 1 feld [52,53]. There are two sites classifed as
※inactive§ for which we judge there to be not enough information for
activity to be considered: the 24?N 30＊ site on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge;
and the site on the EPR 14 N Seamount that was discovered and sampled
by a single dredge that recovered hydrothermal material [54]. Finally,
there is a record for an inactive site at Mata Nima in the Lau Basin;
however, no published record of hydrothermal vents, either active or
inactive, can be found for this specifc volcano.
Among the list of ※active§ sites in the InterRidge database are also
sites that are known to be inactive. The Petersburgskoe site (MidAtlantic Ridge) is listed as ※Active, inferred§, but no indications of activity at this feld have been reported [23]. Also, ※Semyenov§ (Mid--
Atlantic Ridge) is listed as a single record, yet as discussed above,
represents a grouping of 5 vent felds, with Semyenov 2 the only active
feld. We know of two other inactive sites (Surprise and Yubileinoe,
Mid-Atlantic Ridge; Bel＊tenev et al., 2017) that are not yet listed in the
database [55].
We therefore identify only 20 sites in the global InterRidge database
that should be considered inactive using the criteria described above
(Table 3). A detailed examination of all 707 records would be required
to evaluate whether other potentially inactive sites are hidden or not
individually listed in this dataset. However, from this initial analysis, the
documented inventory of inactive deposits is very low, and points to 1)
how little information we have on inactive deposits, including inactive
SMS deposits; and 2) the need to improve our ability to locate inactive
deposits.
Within the current inventory of inactive deposits that formed along
mid-ocean ridges (i.e. excluding deposits that formed on seamounts) all
occur within or on the ?anks of the ridge axial valley (i.e. on-axis), which
represents the neovolcanic zone, which can be tens of kilometers wide,
and is associated with the locus of volcanic and hydrothermal activity
along mid-ocean ridges [3]. For example, the Petersburgskoe deposit on
the Mid-Atlantic Ridge is located on the western wall of the axial valley,
16 km from the ridge axis [23]; Lost City, on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge is
14 km from the ridge axis [8]; and the Penumbra deposit on the Central
Indian Ridge is 14 km from the ridge axis [50]. As sea?oor spreading
continues, deposits that form on-axis will eventually migrate off-axis,
and away from the heat source that drives the hydrothermal circulation. Off-axis deposits are therefore likely extinct, and attractive
exploration targets for contractors. In fact, since all oceanic crust formed
at mid-ocean ridges, the entire ocean basins may be prospective for
extinct SMS deposits. The preservation of such deposits, which is likely
controlled by the interplay of sulfde oxidation rates and burial by
sediment or lava, will be a major factor in understanding the off-axis
resource potential, although the abundance of VMS found in abducted
oceanic terrains on land indicates that at least some fraction of these
deposits is preserved.


Conclusions and implications for mining and exploration

The classifcation of hydrothermal activity, inactivity, and extinction
that we defne here is simple and geologically concise. Defning the
extent of hydrothermal vent felds, which is necessary for delimiting the
boundary to which a classifcation of activity would apply, however,
presents a greater challenge. For the purposes of defning hydrothermal
activity in relation to mining activities, it is important to note that,
although mining will occur at the deposit scale, the geological connectivity that defnes a vent feld necessitates that the criteria used to
classify the state of activity must extend beyond the limits of the deposit
itself and be considered at the vent feld scale. If an inactive deposit
occurs within a vent feld that is hydrothermally active (i.e. any regions
within the feld show evidence of activity or recently activity), the
overall feld must still be hydrothermally connected to its heat source,
and all deposits within the feld have the potential to resume activity.
Therefore, deposits within an active vent feld may be described as
active or inactive, with the caveat that inactive sections of an active vent
feld may be expected to resume activity; and the classifcation of any
deposit as extinct requires that the entire vent feld be inactive and not
geologically connected to any active venting. It is expected that any
extinct hydrothermal feld would satisfy the following three criteria: 1)
absence of ?uid discharge from the sea?oor at temperatures above that
of ambient bottom water; 2) a lack upright chimneys; 3) extensive
oxidation of hydrothermal material; and 4) absence of live vent-?uid
dependent biological communities.
Although designating areas or individual deposits within an overall
active system as ※active§ or ※inactive§ may be biologically relevant over
observed timescales, this approach lacks a connection to subsea?oor
processes and the validity of these designations may not persist when the
subsea?oor is disturbed by both natural events (e.g., magmatic or
tectonic activity) and human modifcations (drilling, mining). This
emphasizes that such designations must take place at the vent feld scale.
Our simple defnition avoids ambiguities associated with other potential criteria for activity classifcation that would rely on continuous,
non-discrete attributes such as vent ?uid temperature or ?ow rates, and
is consistent with an understanding of hydrothermal activity that at the
primary level is defned by the presence of hydrothermal ?uid ?ow. In
the absence of a detailed sub-sea?oor understanding of the plumbing of
hydrothermal systems, including the dynamism of reservoirs, surface
parameters are described that can indicate cessation of hydrothermal
activity at the vent-feld scale, including the lack of a hydrothermal
plume and the absence of upright chimneys; as well as geological parameters that can be used to consider the extent of a vent feld and
differentiate geologically discrete felds on a ridge segment. Generally,
felds on faster spreading segments exhibit more dynamic variability and
felds on slow spreading ridges may be stable over thousands of years.
However, indicators that hydrothermal activity can cease and restart,
with hiatus lasting between less than one and several thousands of years,
as well as begin in ※inactive§ regions of an active feld as a result of
drilling, demonstrate that we should label entire hydrothermal felds
extinct with caution.
The implication of this binary geologic defnition of activity is that,
in the vast majority of cases where mineral exploration is occurring,
both within EEZs and Areas Beyond National Jurisdictions, the main
area of interest is an active hydrothermal feld. However, the small
number of known inactive deposits does not necessary re?ect a low
resource potential for inactive SMS deposits. Instead, it highlights our
only cursory understanding of the distribution, preservation and ability
to explore for these deposits. This provides abundant motivation for
further research into the processes of SMS formation from hydrothermal
?uids and reinforces the need to continue to explore the ocean basins,
especially further away from the ridge crest.

