




Solid Electrolyte Interphase Growth to Rank LiIon Cell Performance




ABSTRACT

    		    A non-destructive technique for physically detecting the growth of the solid
		electrolyte interphase (SEI) during cycling of Li-ion pouch cells is presented.
		Operando cell-stack pressure measurements performed on constrained pouch
		cells reveal a correlation between irreversible volume expansion and capacity
		loss caused by a continually thickening SEI. Several silicon-containing fullcell 
		chemistries—LCO/graphite:Si-alloy, NCA/graphite:SiO, and NCA/Si:C—as
		well as a conventional NMC/graphite cell chemistry were investigated. The effect 
		of FEC consumption on catastrophic failure was also investigated by
		comparing cells containing 10% FEC and 1% FEC. We show that once FEC is
		depleted, passivation failure occurs, resulting in massive, irreversible expansion
		indicating runaway SEI thickening and concomitant cell failure. This work demonstrates 
		that irreversible volume expansion caused by SEI growth can be detected with
 		operando pressure measurements, thus presenting a valuable tool
		for studying the degradation of Li-ion pouch cells and ranking the performance
		of different cell chemistries


INTRODUCTION

    The solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) has been called the most important but least
understood part of lithium ion (Li-ion) cells.1 Formed from the insoluble reaction
products of electrode-electrolyte reactions, the SEI passivates electrodes and
suppresses these parasitic reactions that consume lithium inventory, enabling the
Li-ion cells to operate. However, the SEI-forming parasitic reactions are never
entirely eliminated; therefore, the evolution of the SEI ultimately governs the lifetime
of Li-ion cells.
    In this work, focus will be given to the SEI that forms on the negative electrode. The
negative electrode SEI has been shown to comprise organic and inorganic products
such as Li2CO3, LiF, Li2O, semicarbonates, and polymers.1–3 However, the exact
nature and evolution of this passivating film remains elusive due to the inherent
difficulty of studying it. The negative electrode SEI is initially several nanometers
thin and can be mechanically unstable. Many experiments to investigate the
morphology and composition of the SEI must be performed ex situ, exposing it to
conditions that may damage this highly delicate film.4–6 Additionally, the SEI is sensitive 
to the cell chemistry it is formed in—the choice of electrolyte composition and
electrode chemistry influence its composition.1,2,7 Since the formation and growth of
the negative electrode SEI is the primary source of capacity loss through lithium
inventory loss for well-engineered cells, methods to probe the evolution and stability of 
the SEI are critical for developing Li-ion cell chemistries with longer lifetimes
Increasing the lifetime and energy density of Li-ion cells is required to decrease the
cost of Li-ion batteries and promote the widespread adoption of electric vehicles.8
Silicon negative electrodes offer a compromise between these requirements as they
provide a significant capacity boost compared to conventional graphite negative
electrodes (3,579 mAhr/g and 2,194 Ahr/L for silicon and Li15Si4 versus 372 mAhr/g
and 719 Ahr/L for graphite and LiC69,10), but this comes at the expense of lifetime.
The Li-ion cells that employ silicon-containing electrode materials exhibit relatively
poor cycle life compared to the Li-ion cells with conventional graphite electrodes,
which can last for thousands of cycles with a capacity retention over 80%. This
decreased lifetime of silicon-containing cells is a result of the large 280% volume
change the Si component experiences during lithiation and delithiation.11 This large
volume expansion precipitates the deterioration of silicon-containing electrodes by
causing electrode delamination,12 inducing large mechanical stress that can pulverize 
electrode particles11,13–15 and accelerating the growth and repair of the negative
electrode SEI.2,9,16 Each of these processes contributes to capacity loss by
decreasing the supply of active lithium inventory within a cell.17–19
    Lithium inventory loss caused by the loss of active electrode material via electrode
delamination and electrode pulverization has been mitigated in state-of-the-art
silicon-containing electrode materials by confining the active silicon components
to nano-sized domains,13,20–22 utilizing active-inactive alloy materials,23,24 and by
compositing silicon with other volumetrically benign active materials such as
carbon.21,25–28 Although these efforts have largely helped overcome mechanical
electrode degradation via active electrode material mass loss, lithium inventory
loss due to negative electrode SEI growth remains the primary source of capacity
loss for silicon electrodes.28 The conventional SEI that is formed on silicon-containing
 particles cannot withstand the mechanical stress induced by the large volume
expansion and contraction of silicon, resulting in mechanical breakdown of the SEI
and exposure of active electrode material to the electrolyte. As a result, parasitic
reactions between the electrolyte and the exposed charged electrode material
continually reform and repair the damaged SEI. This occurs with every chargedischarge
 cycle; therefore, lithium inventory is continually consumed by SEI growth,
resulting in capacity loss and a thickened, porous SEI layer.2 This has motivated the
development of mechanically flexible, stable SEI chemistries that can withstand
large mechanical stress and volume expansion.29
    Electrolytes containing fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) have proven beneficial for
the lifetime of Li-ion cells with many silicon-containing negative electrodes.30–32
As such, FEC has become a common electrolyte component utilized with silicon
electrodes. FEC has a higher reduction potential compared to typical organic
solvents such as ethylene carbonate (EC) and ethylmethyl carbonate (EMC).
Therefore, when FEC is introduced as an additive (<10% wt) in typical organic carbonate-
based electrolyte, it has been shown that FEC preferentially reacts at the
negative electrode surface, suppressing the reduction of other electrolyte components.33–35 
Improved cell performance has been attributed to a less porous, more
inorganic, LiF-rich SEI formed from FEC reduction that is more stable during
cycling.30,36 Consequently, it has been shown that sudden cell failure, a rapid capacity loss 
of >30% over ca. 10 cycles, occurs once FEC in the electrolyte is depleted as
a result of parasitic reactions and electrolyte consumption due to continual SEI
growth and repair caused by the mechanical strain of electrode volume expansion.33,34 Such
sudden failure is catastrophic to the performance of Li-ion cells. In
this present work, we ascribe this catastrophic failure caused by FEC depletion in
cells with silicon-composite negative electrodes to passivation failure and thus
runaway SEI growth as revealed by operando pressure measurements, which, herein
we demonstrate probes SEI evolution by measuring irreversible volume expansion.
    Cell-stack volume expansion has previously been measured with thickness evolution
measurements at a constant load using specialized in-situ force-displacement
cells37,38 and with in-situ pressure measurements using strain gauges mounted on
cylindrical-type cells39 to understand electrode swelling during cycling and electrode degradation. 
Further measurements to probe the reversible expansion of
insertion electrodes used in Li-ion cells as well as the irreversible expansion concomitant with 
prolonged cycling have been performed with in-situ atomic force microscopy,11 
electrochemical dilatometry,16,40–42 3D digital image correlation,43,44 and
mechanical stress measurements.45–47 In this work, we present operando pressure
measurements performed on constrained machine-made pouch cells tested under
commercially relevant conditions as a technique to investigate the degradation of
Li-ion cells with various electrode-electrolyte chemistries, specifically cells with
different silicon composite negative electrodes. We have previously employed
operando pressure measurements to reveal the reversible volume expansion of
Li-ion pouch cells caused by the net electrode volume change during charge and
discharge, and we have identified a correlation between irreversible expansion
and cell performance with prolonged cycling.48 Glazier et al.49 have utilized operando 
pressure measurements to determine Li-ion cell chemistries with low
irreversible volume expansion as a figure of merit for ranking long-term cell performance. 
In this present work, we confirm that operando pressure measurements
reveal irreversible volume expansion caused by SEI growth and thus correlate to
cell performance since lithium inventory loss to negative electrode SEI growth
causes capacity fade. We demonstrate how this technique is useful for ranking
cell chemistries with superior lifetimes by correlating capacity loss with SEI growth
revealed by operando pressure measurements.
    Short-term measurements to characterize the long-term performance of Li-ion cells
are highly desired to facilitate the development of new cell chemistries. Other techniques 
such as ultra-high precision coulometry and isothermal microcalorimetry also
serve to indirectly probe SEI evolution to rank the performance of Li-ion cell chemistries. 
Although highly successful,49–52 these techniques require costly high precision equipment.53,54
 In contrast, the operando pressure method presented in this work can be implemented at a fraction
of the cost and is compatible with any commercial charging system. As such, this technique is readily 
translatable to any battery testing facility, which should be of interest to the Li-ion cell development
community


METHOD

Cell Preparation
    Pouch cells werereceived fromreputable manufacturers sealed without electrolyte. Cells
were opened, dried under vacuum at 100C for 14 hr, and transferred into an argon-filled
glovebox for electrolyte filling and resealing. Before testing, cells were allowed to stand
for 24 hr at 1.5 V to allow for the completion of wetting and then were charged-discharged up
 to 4.2 V and back down to 3.8 V at C/20 at 40C as a formation step. Cells
were then transferred back into an argon-filled glovebox and opened to remove any
gas generated during the formation processes and subsequently resealed.
Pressure Measurements
    Figure S1B shows the apparatus used for performing operando pressure measurements. Pouch 
cells were uniaxially constrained in aluminum enclosures such that
any change in thickness of the cell electrode stack (jelly roll) would result in a change
of force exerted on the enclosure. The pouch cells have a gas bag connected to the
jelly roll that protrudes from the aluminum enclosure (see Figures S1A and S1B),
forcing any gas that was formed during cycling out of the jelly roll into the gas bag.
Therefore, any gas generated does not contribute to the force on the enclosure;
only uniaxial swelling of the cell stack is probed. The force within the enclosure was
measured with subminiature load cells (model LCKD—Omega Engineering) connected to strain 
gauge panel meters (model DP25B-S-A—Omega Engineering) and
was converted to pressure in PSI using the area of a pouch cell of 0.93.2 A force distributing plate 
was fastened between the load cell and the pouch cell. Figure S1C shows a
schematic of this setup. During cycling, a change in pressure on the order of 100 PSI
was observed, which corresponds to a change of thickness of tens of micrometers as
revealed from the measured compressibility curves for each cell type shown in Figure S8. Operando
 measurements were performed using an E-One Moli Energy Canada battery testing system. Pouch 
cells were connected to a Moli channel, and the analog 0–10 V output of the strain gauge panel meter 
was connected to an adjacent Moli slave channel, allowing for simultaneous electrochemical and pressure 
measurements. Cells were cycled at 40C between 3–4.2 V at C/3, with periodic C/20 characterization cycles
for differential voltage analysis.
Differential Voltage Analysis
    To elucidate the mechanisms of capacity loss during cycling, differential voltage
(dV/dQ) analysis was performed. Introduced by Bloom et al.,62 dV/dQ analysis can
be used to deconvolute and quantify the contributions to capacity fade via lithium
inventory loss due to negative electrode SEI growth and loss of active positive or
negative electrode material (e.g., via delamination, pulverization or electrical
disconnection) referred to as electrode mass loss in this work.17–19 This is done by
carefully fitting cycled full-cell voltage curves with a linear combination of half-cell
reference voltage curves for each electrode. The parameters derived from this fit
are the positive and negative electrode active masses and the positive and negative
electrode shifts. The electrode masses act as scalar multipliers to the half-cell
voltage curves, and the electrode shifts are translations such that the half-cell curves
are stretched and shifted relative to each other until a good fit of the full-cell curve
is achieved. As the electrodes lose active material, their voltage curves will correspondingly 
shrink in capacity. Degradation due to mass loss is thus tracked by monitoring the 
capacity of half-cell voltage curves required to fit the full-cell given by the
electrode mass parameters. When lithium inventory is lost to growth of the negative
electrode SEI, capacity is lost because completely delithiating the negative electrode can no 
longer fully lithiate the positive electrode at the discharged state of
the full cell. As lithium inventory is continually lost to SEI growth, the difference in
capacity between the fully delithiated negative electrode and the fully lithiated positive
 electrode becomes larger and larger. Degradation due to SEI growth is thus
tracked by monitoring the translations of the half-cell voltage curves required to
achieve a good fit. Some previous works have called this slippage17,58; here, this
is referred to as shift, and the capacity loss due to growing relative shifts between
the half-cell voltage curves is called shift loss.
    Figure S9 shows examples of how the half-cell and full-cell voltage curves are
affected by capacity loss due to mass loss and negative electrode SEI growth (shift
loss). Since Li-ion cell voltage versus capacity curves generally do not exhibit
pronounced features, it is the differential voltage versus capacity curves that are
used to increase the ease and accuracy of fitting.
    2325-type coin cells were prepared as half-cells for each electrode material as reference
 data for dV/dQ analysis for type A, B, and D cells. The positive and negative
electrodes were retrieved from fresh type A, B, and D pouch cells and punched
into 1.28-cm diameter disks. Two Celgard 2,320 thin polypropylene microporous
films were used as separators. A 150-mm-thick lithium metal foil (Chemetall,
>99.99%) was punched into 1.4-cm diameter disks as the reference electrode. 1M
LiPF6 EC:DEC (1:2 by volume) was used as electrolyte, fully wetting the electrodes
and separators. Coin cells were assembled in an argon-filled glove box. Cells
were cycled at 40C on an E-One Moli Energy Canada battery testing system at a
slow C/20 rate to minimize kinetic effects on cell performance, as required to obtain
quality dV/dQ data for fitting. Fitting was performed on full-cell data during periodic
C/20 characterization cycles, which occurred throughout the life of the cells. This
analysis was performed using software developed by Asher Wright, which performed
 the fits and determined the positive and negative electrode mass and shift
parameters, similar to earlier freeware released by Dahn et al.58
X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
    To investigate the SEI evolution for type A and B pouch cells, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
 (XPS) measurements were performed. Cells after formation (cycle 0) and after
40 cycles were fully discharged and transferred to an Ar-filled glove box for disassembly
and sample retrieval. The negative electrodes were dissected and rinsed several times
with EMC to remove dried LiPF6 and EC. Removal of these species is essential for the underlying SEI 
components to be observed by XPS and for maintaining low pressures in the
XPS system. Rinsingwith EMC isnotexpected to dissolve anySEI components, as EMC is
a major component of the electrolyte in which the SEI was formed. Once the rinsed
samples were dried, they were mounted onto a molybdenum sample holder using double-sided, 
ultra-high vacuum-compatible copper tape. The sample holder was then
transferred into the XPS system, without exposure to air, using a specially designed
air-tight apparatus that could be evacuated to low pressures. Electrodes were left under
ultra-high vacuum overnight to allow for off-gassing of any remaining volatile components. The
 samples were then transferred to the analysis chamber of the XPS, which
has a base pressure of 1 3 1010 mbar and was maintained below 2 3 109 mbar during
the experiments. Analysis was performed with a SPECS spectrometer equipped with a
Phoibos 150 hemispherical analyser, using unmonochromatized Mg Ka radiation with
a beam spot width of 5 mm and a pass energy of 20 eV. Preliminary and final survey scans
were compared to ensure that no photochemical degradation was induced during analysis. Data 
analysis was performed using CasaXPS software (v. 2.3.18). Charge correction
was performed by fitting the adventitious carbon peak, and shifting the x axis such that
this peak fell at 285.0 eV. XPS spectra were fit with a non-linear Shirley-type background.
This background was subtracted from the signal to allow for qualitative comparison of
atomic concentrations between samples using relative peak areas. Peaks were fit with
a mixed Gaussian (70%)/Lorentzian (30%) line shape


RESULT

    402035-size pouch cells (40 mm long 3 20 mm wide 3 3.5 mm thick) with a rolled
electrode design, pictured in Figure S1A, were tested in this work. Table 1 lists
the five different cell types that were investigated. The positive electrodes used in
these cells represent typical choices used by industry in products on the market
today: LiCoO2 is most commonly used in portable electronics, while NMC and
NCA positive electrodes are favored for electric vehicles due to their higher energy
density and decreased reliance on expensive cobalt.55 Four out of five chemistries
tested here employ a silicon composite negative electrode, and one chemistry
uses a conventional graphite negative electrode for comparison. Each cell type
exhibits a different electrode chemistry except for type D and E cells, which use
the same electrode materials but differ in loading; type E cells have thicker electrodes.
 The solvents used for the electrolyte in this work were ethylene carbonate
(EC), ethylmethyl carbonate (EMC), and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) (BASF 99.99%).
The additives used were vinylene carbonate (VC, BASF 99.97%), 1,3,2-dioxathiolane-2,
2-dioxide (ethylene sulfate, DTD, Sigma-Aldrich 98%), and fluoroethylene
carbonate (FEC, BASF 99.94%). All electrolytes contained 1.2 M LiPF6. The electrolyte 
formulations used for each cell chemistry are listed in Table 1. The specific
combinations of solvents and additives were chosen based on previous experience
with what performed well with each electrode chemistry.


DISCUSSION

Reversible Volume Expansion
    Figure 1 shows operando pressure data for type A NMC/graphite (A–C) and type B
LCO/graphite:Si-alloy (D–E) cells for one cycle. Figures 1A and 1D show the voltage
versus capacity of these cells during charge and discharge. Figures 1B and 1E show
the pressure profiles. The reversible pressure evolution is caused by the reversible
net volume expansion of the constituent electrodes. This behavior is thoroughly
explained in our previous work.48 In brief, when the full cell is charged, the negative
electrode is lithiated resulting in a volume expansion (e.g., 10% for graphite, 280%
for silicon), and the positive electrode is delithiated, generally resulting in a
small volume change (e.g., a contraction of 3% and 5% for NMC and NCA and an
expansion of 1% for LCO). The opposite occurs during discharge. The relatively
large negative electrode expansion thus dominates the total volume change, resulting in a 
net increase in volume during charge and a net decrease in volume during
discharge, generating a reversible pressure evolution for one cycle.
    Figures 1C and 1F show the negative electrode voltage (dark teal) and differential
voltage (teal) versus capacity curves fit to the full cell determined by differential
voltage (dV/dQ) analysis. Such analysis allows the full-cell voltage curve to be deconvoluted
 into its constituent positive and negative electrode voltage curves; the latter
is shown in Figures 1C and 1F. This allows the two-phase coexistence regions and
the single-phase regions—which appear as plateaus and peaks, respectively, in
the differential voltage curves of the negative electrode—to be identified to elucidate 
the volume expansion profile. In Figure 1C, the plateau observed at 0.1 V
in the graphite voltage curve corresponds to the 2L/2 and the 2/2L staging transition 
during lithiation (charge of the full cell) and de-lithiation (discharge of the full
cell), respectively.56 Previous studies have shown how graphite does not change in
volume during this phase transition.57 This is in excellent agreement with the operando
 pressure data, wherein, over the 2L/2 and 2/2L transitions highlighted, the
cell does not experience any change in volume. Furthermore, Figure 1B shows that
the type A graphite negative cell exhibits a very symmetric volume expansion.
    In contrast, the operando pressure data for the type B cell with a graphite:Si-alloy
negative cell shown in Figure 1E reveal a highly asymmetric expansion profile.
This is caused by the charge-discharge hysteresis exhibited by silicon electrode
materials.9,48 Figure 1E also displays the graphite 2L42 phase transition plateau;
however, here it is not completely flat due to the expansion (during charge) and
contraction (during discharge) that the silicon component of the electrode
experiences during the graphite plateau resulting in a net slope.
Irreversible Volume Expansion
    Figure 2A compares the capacity retention of type A and B cells. The type A cell with
a graphite negative exhibits no capacity loss, whereas the type B cell with a graphite:
Si-alloy negative experiences a 15% capacity loss after 100 cycles. Figure 2B
shows the operando pressure data versus time. During each cycle, there is a reversible 
pressure evolution caused by electrode expansion and contraction. Over several
cycles, an irreversible pressure evolution caused by an irreversible volume expansion
begins to develop. This can be more clearly tracked with the average discharge
pressure for each cycle as a function of time shown in purple triangles and pink
diamonds for type A and type B cells, respectively. The irreversible pressure growth
mirrors the capacity retention data, demonstrating an inverse correlation between
capacity loss and pressure growth. The average discharge pressure data show
that type A cells exhibit minimal irreversible expansion, whereas type B cells experience 
significant irreversible expansion. It should be noted here that gas evolution
cannot be the cause of the irreversible pressure growth because of how the pouch
cells are constrained during measurement, as shown in Figure S1B. Pouch cells are
uniaxially constrained with a pressure sensor positioned to measure the uniaxial
pressure on the jelly roll (the cell electrode stack) such that only thickening of the jelly
roll affects measured pressure. Any gas evolved is pushed in to the adjoining ‘‘pouch
bag and does not contribute to the pressure signal measured. Therefore, the
irreversible pressure growth is caused by thickening of the jelly roll.
    Figure 2C shows the shift loss as a function of cycle number derived from differential
voltage (dV/dQ) analysis, which elucidates the mechanisms of lithium inventory loss
as discussed in the Experimental Procedures section. This analysis yields parameters
for the electrode masses and electrode shifts determined by fitting full-cell voltage
curves with linear combinations of half-cell reference curves. If the electrode mass
parameters are found to decrease as a function of cycle number, at least some
lithium inventory is lost to electrode degradation. If the half-cell voltage curves
are found to shift relative to each other, at least some lithium inventory is lost is
due to SEI growth17—this mode of capacity loss is referred to as shift loss. The
dV/dQ fits for Figure 2C are shown in Figure S2. The positive and negative electrode
mass and shift parameters as a function of cycle number are shown in Figure S3, and
a table of these parameters is shown in Table S1. Figures S3A and S3B show that
there is negligible electrode mass loss that occurs during cycling for both cell chemistries.
The shift loss, calculated as the difference in positive and negative electrode
shifts, quantifies the capacity lost due to negative electrode SEI growth and
repair.17,58 With no significant mass loss, the increasing shift loss shown in Figure 2C
indicates that the primary source of capacity loss in these cells is negative electrode
SEI growth. Figure 2C shows that type A graphite negative cells show minimal
growth of shift loss, whereas type B graphite:Si-alloy cells exhibit a significant increase
of shift loss and thus exhibit significant negative electrode SEI growth
Type B cells have an initial capacity of 230 mAhr, so the 35 mAhr shift loss accounts
for the entirety of the 15% loss of capacity observed in Figure 2A. The trends
observed in irreversible pressure growth shown in Figure 2B are in good agreement
with the shift loss measurements presented in Figure 2C, indicating that negative
electrode SEI growth is the cause of irreversible volume expansion probed with 
operando pressure measurements.
    To further elucidate the cause of the irreversible pressure growth, X-ray photoelectron 
spectroscopy measurements were performed on the negative electrodes of
type A and B cells before and after cycle testing. Figure 3 shows the C1s XPS spectra
of negative electrodes taken from type A and B cells after formation (cycle 0, A,
and C) and after 40 cycles (B, D). After formation, the XPS spectra for both negative
electrode chemistries exhibited peaks at 284 eV (shaded) corresponding to the
underlying graphite component of the electrodes. This suggests that before cycling,
the SEI layers on both electrode chemistries are thinner than the maximum XPS
penetration depth of ca. 10 nm such that the electrode particles beneath the SEI
surface contribute to the signal. After 40 cycles, this graphite peak remains visible
and is of approximately the same area for the type A graphite electrode sample,
which indicates that the thickness of the SEI has not changed significantly during
cycling for this cell. In contrast, the type B graphite:Si-alloy electrode sample does
not exhibit the graphite peak after 40 cycles, indicating the graphite has become
obstructed after cycling. The SEI on the graphite component of type B cells is not
expected to grow significantly; it should be as stable as in the type A negative
electrode. Therefore, these results suggest that the SEI on the silicon component
has grown significantly such that the thickened silicon SEI obstructs the graphite
component of the electrode from the XPS beam. These results are in agreement
with the hypothesis that the irreversible pressure measurements shown in Figure 2B
are a result of significant SEI growth in type B graphite:Si-alloy negative cells and the
relative stability of the SEI in type A graphite negative cells.
    The proposed mechanism illustrating the inverse correlation between irreversible
volume expansion and capacity loss due to negative electrode SEI growth is
depicted in Figure 4. Figure 4A shows a schematic of a generic negative electrode,
consisting of electrode active material particles coated on a current collector. Each
particle is passivated with an SEI layer. When the negative electrode is lithiated, 
during a full-cell charge, the particles will expand based on the active material used
(e.g., 10% expansion for graphite; 280% expansion for silicon). This expansion is
shown in Figure 4B. Unable to fully accommodate large volume expansion, the
SEI layer will be damaged, leaving areas of the charged particles exposed to electrolyte,
 inducing new parasitic reactions that will form new SEI causing further lithium
inventory loss. This results in a thicker SEI after one cycle, as depicted in Figure 4C,
and this effect will scale with the magnitude of electrode expansion. Another
possible degradation mechanism caused by large volume expansion is fracture of
electrode particles resulting in lithium inventory loss due to electrode mass loss,
as illustrated in Figures 4B and 4C. However, the cells investigated in this work do
not exhibit significant electrode mass loss, as evidenced by Figure S3. Therefore,
the primary mechanism of capacity fade for cells studied in this work is lithium 
inventory loss due to negative electrode SEI growth and repair. After repeating this process, 
A through C, for many cycles, a much thickened SEI evolves,2 as depicted in
Figure 4D. This results in a thickened electrode stack and irreversible volume expansion,
 which is detected with operando pressure measurements. Previous works by
Chae et al.28 and Wetjen et al.59 have reported silicon-composite electrode materials,
 which develop fractures and cracks that increase particle surface area but do
not precipitate loss of active material. As a result, a nano-porous structure develops,
and SEI is formed within this porous structure. This situation is analogous to the
scheme presented in Figure 4D, but SEI is formed within the particle in addition to
on the particle surface, resulting in an observable irreversible volume expansion.28,59
    Figure 5 shows conventional electrochemical cycling results often used to rank the
performance of Li-ion cells along with operando pressure measurements. Figure 5A
shows capacity versus cycle number data for each cell type investigated in this work.
Results for type A cells are shown with purple triangles. Type A cells are the only
chemistry investigated here without a silicon-containing negative electrode, and
these cells clearly exhibit the best performance. Type D and E cells, shown with
blue triangles and orange circles, respectively (different shades of each represent
repeat experiments), exhibit similar short-term performance; however, the type E
cells seem to show better performance after ca. 100 cycles. This is difficult to confirm
with short-term cycling results; long-term cycling performed for these cells shown in
Figure S4 indeed shows that type E cells perform better than type D cells. This may
be explained by type D cells containing a slightly larger proportion of silicon than
type E cells, as evidenced by the half-cell data for both cell types presented in Figure S5. 
A larger silicon content would amplify lithium inventory loss due to SEI
growth and repair as illustrated in Figure 4. Type C cells, shown with green squares,
experience poor short-term capacity retention. However, long-term cycling data
presented in Figure S4 show that type C cells experience better long-term capacity
retention compared to type D and E cells. Type B cells shown with pink diamonds
exhibit the worst capacity retention. From the cycling data presented in Figure 5A
and the long-term cycling data presented in Figure S4, a ranking of the performance
of these cells can be made, from best to worst: type A > type C > type E > type D >
type B. Figure 5B shows the change in average discharge pressure versus cycle number 
Type A cells (purple triangles) show the least irreversible volume expansion. In
order of increasing expansion, type C cells (green squares) exhibit the second smallest 
expansion, then type E cells (orange circles), and type D cells (blue triangles), with
type B cells (pink diamonds) exhibiting the largest irreversible volume expansion.
This ranking of irreversible expansion is in good agreement with the ranking of
capacity retention versus cycle number. Figure 5C shows polarization growth (DV)
versus cycle number The rate of polarization growth for each cell chemistry is consistent
 with the rankings of irreversible expansion and capacity retention. This is more
clearly demonstrated in Figures 5D–5F, which show the rate of capacity growth
versus cycle number (Figure 5D), the rate of pressure growth versus cycle number
(Figure 5E) and the rate of polarization growth versus cycle number (Figure 5F),
calculated for the last 10 cycles of testing. The error bars in Figures 5D–5F correspond to
 the range between repeat tests. The rate of pressure growth at the end
of testing shown in Figure 5E exhibits the clearest ranking of the five cell chemistries
tested here. Ranking performance based on short-term measurements of capacity
retention or DV is not as clear, exemplifying the benefit of operando 
pressure measurements beyond short-term electrochemical measurements.
Effect of FEC Consumption
    To determine the effect of FEC consumption on catastrophic cell failure and irreversible
volume expansion, type B LCO/graphite:Si-alloy and type D NCA/Si:C cells
were tested with electrolytes containing 10% and 1% FEC. It has previously been
shown that FEC in electrolyte used in Si-containing cells is gradually consumed as
a result of continual parasitic reactions and reformation of mechanically damaged
negative electrode SEI and that this consumption eventually causes cell failure
once FEC is entirely depleted.33,34 This is in good agreement with Figure 6A which
shows capacity versus cycle number for type B and D cells containing 10% and 1%
FEC, respectively. Type B cells with 1% FEC, shown with full red diamonds, exhibit
dramatic failure after ca. 50 cycles, whereas type B cells with 10% FEC, shown with
empty pink diamonds, run for over 100 cycles without dramatic failure. Type D cells
with 1% FEC, shown with full teal triangles (repeat experiments shown with different
shades), exhibit dramatic failure after ca. 250 cycles, whereas type D cells with 10%
FEC, shown with empty blue triangles (repeat experiments shown with different
shades), run for over 300 cycles without failure. Operando pressure data were only
available for type B cells with 10% FEC up until 130 cycles; conventional cycling
data for type D cells with 10% FEC cycles are included in Figure 6A (purple triangles,
labeled ‘‘No P’’ in the legend) to demonstrate catastrophic failure does not occur up
to 300 cycles.
    Figure 6B shows the average discharge pressure versus cycle number for these cells.
The cells with 10% FEC content exhibit constant pressure growth, mirroring their capacity
loss. The cells with 1% FEC content show massive inflections in pressure
growth corresponding to where catastrophic failure begins. Figure 6C shows the
change in relative slippage for type B and D cells containing 1% FEC derived from
dV/dQ fitting every 50th cycle. The dV/dQ fits for these cells are shown in Figure S6
The negative and positive electrode mass and slippage parameters derived from
this analysis are shown in Figure S7, and a table of these parameters is shown in
Table S1. Figures S7A and S7B show that the electrode masses remain relatively unchanged 
throughout cycling. Therefore, the significant growth of shift loss shown in
Figure 6C indicates the primary mechanism for capacity loss is attributed to negative
electrode SEI growth. Figure 6C shows the relative slippage exhibits an inflection in
accordance to where type B and D cells with 1% FEC exhibit catastrophic failure and
inflections in pressure growth. We conclude that once FEC is consumed, cell failure
occurs due to passivation failure, resulting in rapidly consumed lithium inventory
causing runaway negative electrode SEI growth and sudden cell death.
    It is also observed that type D cells with 10% FEC exhibit a larger rate of irreversible
pressure growth compared to cells containing 1% FEC. This is consistent with the
capacity retention data that shows cells with 10% FEC initially perform slightly worse
than cells with 1% FEC prior to FEC depletion and catastrophic failure. It may seem
counterintuitive that higher FEC content initially results in worse performance;
however, this behavior is consistent with other literature reports. Jaumann et al.60
have shown results for cells with SiC negative electrodes that contain electrolyte
with 20% FEC exhibit a lower CE than cells with 10% FEC; Jung et al.34 have also
shown that increasing FEC content from 5% to 10% to 20% slightly decreases the
initial capacity retention prior to FEC consumption. Nguyen and Lucht61 have shown
that non-composite silicon electrodes exhibit larger impedance with increasing FEC
content, and that the SEI correspondingly is comprised of increased concentrations
of fluorinated species such as LiF and poly(FEC). Our results suggest that cells with
10% FEC exhibit a larger irreversible expansion than cells with 1% FEC, indicating a
thicker evolved SEI. We speculate that higher FEC content results in a thicker, more
resistive, less compliant, and more brittle SEI, which is less capable of adapting to
the large volume expansion of silicon-containing electrodes resulting in higher rates
of SEI repair and lithium inventory loss. Further work studying the effect of varying
FEC content on the evolution of the SEI and the short-term performance of silicon-
containing Li-ion cells is required to elucidate this behavior more completely.
Correlation between Capacity Loss and Pressure Growth
    To further exemplify the inverse correlation between capacity retention and irreversible
pressure growth, Figure 7 shows the rate of capacity loss versus rate of pressure
growth per cycle calculated for the final 10 cycles of testing. A linear trend is found
between the rate of capacity loss and the rate of pressure growth; cells that exhibit
more rapid capacity loss exhibit larger rates of pressure growth. This inverse correlation 
between capacity retention and irreversible expansion is in good agreement
with previous works, which monitored the swelling of Li-ion cells, e.g., the works by
Wilkinson and Wainwright,38 Cannarella and Arnold,46 and Wetjen et al.


CONCLUSION

    In this work, we utilized operando pressure measurements to reveal the reversible and
irreversible volume expansion of Li-ion pouch cells. Mechanically constrained pouch
cells fit with pressure sensors exhibited a reversible pressure evolution because of
the net expansion and contraction of electrode materials during charge and discharge,
as well as an irreversible pressure growth concomitant with cycling. Irreversible pressure
growth was shown to be inversely correlated to cell performance based on capacity
retention and polarization growth measurements for a variety of different electrodee-
lectrolyte chemistries. We attributed this correlation to negative electrode SEI growth,
which causes the irreversible volume expansion of the electrode stack observed with
operando pressure measurements, and consequently results in capacity fade due to
lithium inventory loss. Cell chemistries with silicon-containing negative electrodes
exhibited worse performance and larger irreversible pressure growth compared to a
cell chemistry with a graphite negative electrode due to a less stable negative electrode
SEI resulting from the larger expansion of silicon materials. This was supported with
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurements and differential voltage analysis,
which showed negative electrode SEI growth was the primary degradation mechanism
for all cell chemistries tested here. Furthermore, we attributed the catastrophic failure of
silicon-containing cell chemistries that exhibit FEC depletion to passivation failure and
runaway negative electrode SEI growth. This work has demonstrated that operando
pressure measurements can be used to probe the evolution of the negative electrode
SEI, and thus the benefit of these measurements as a tool for investigating the degradation
and ranking the performance of different Li-ion cell chemistries. Future work
optimizing electrolyte chemistries with new additive combinations to stabilize the SEI
evolution of Li-ion cells with silicon-containing negative electrodes using operando
pressure measurements is encouraged.