Electrochemomechanics of lithium dendrite growthABSTRACT		    A comprehensive roadmap describing the current density- and size-dependent dendrite growth		mechanisms is presented. Based on a thermodynamically consistent theory, the combined effects of		chemical diffusion, electrodeposition, and elastic and plastic deformation kinetics are analyzed to		rationalize their contributions to experimentally observable morphologies. A critical current density,		ˆı* = zFiliml(DGOki), in the ts o t o tSand range, results in plastic flow at the tips, dendrite bifurcation,		and bent and kinked morphologies. Three dendrite growth mechanisms are observed: (1) electro-		chemical shielding, where there is practically no electrodeposition/electrodissolution; (2) stress-		induced electrodissolution and electrodeposition on those interfaces directly facing each other,		generating a self-sustained overpotential that pushes the dendrites towards the counter electrode;		and (3) local, lateral plastic extrusion in those side branches experiencing non-hydrostatic stresses.		Six regimes of lithium electrodeposit growth are identified: (i) thermodynamic suppression regime,		(ii) incubation regime, (iii) base-controlled regime, (iv) tip-controlled regime, (v) mixed regime, and		(vi) Sand's regime.INTRODUCTION    The growth of elongated, branched structures, commonly referredto as “dendrites,” is an inherent problem in the development ofadvanced rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, has been classicallyattributed to long-range diffusion limitations in the electrolyte,1poses serious safety issues,2 and has been one of the majorbottlenecks in their commercialization. The problem of lithiumdendrite growth remains mostly unsolved due to the contributionof multiple, apparently competing, growth mechanisms. It hasbeen widely observed in several independent experimental reportsthat lithium grows from the tip at high applied currents densitiesand from the base at low current densities.3–5 Arakawa6 firstproposed that lithium ‘‘extrudes’’ from the base at low currentdensities, while the tip morphology remains unchanged.Crowther and West7 demonstrated the transition of ‘‘tip-controlled growth’’ to ‘‘base-controlled growth’’ after B420 sof galvanostatic electrodeposition of lithium metal on a coppersubstrate at a current density of 2 mA cm2. Recently, Cui et al.8showed the nucleation of hemispherical electrodeposits for arange of current densities (see J in Fig. 1), and confirmed Elyand Garcı ´a’s analytical predictions.9 Cui and coworkers10 alsodemonstrated the growth of non-dendritic, columnar Li elec-trodeposits under a hollow carbon layer (see x in Fig. 1).Bazant, Li, and coworkers4 reported experimental observationsof transitions between distinguishable growth mechanisms,from a base-controlled, mossy microstructure, to a tip-controlled,diffusion-limited dendritic microstructure (see & in Fig. 1).Highly branched and symmetrical dendritic patterns (see } inFig. 1) were experimentally reported by Tatsuma and coworkers11for Li electrodeposited on a Cu substrate at 3 mA cm2 for onehour from a gel-based electrolyte.    Three timescales of lithium dendrite growth are identifiedin the literature: (i) a characteristic deposition time, t0 = 2gRT/j0O2DGf2 B 1 s, required to overcome the initial electrochemical energy barrier for electrodeposition, as proposed by Ely,9required for the onset of diffusion limitations in the electrolyte,as recently reported by Bazant and coworkers,4 and (iii) acharacteristic plasticity time, (for B5 MPa stress), required forinitial stresses to relax through plastic flow of lithium, asproposed in previous work.12 Symbols used in this paper aresummarized in Table 1, while material parameter values aresummarized in Table 2. Bazant et al.4,5 further defined a criticalelectrodeposited charge, the Sand’s capacity, Q = itSand, todefine the regime boundary of dendritic and non-dendriticgrowth and hypothesized a stress driven base-controlled or''root growth'' mechanism. Recent analytical work12 rationalizedfor the first time the contribution of lithium plasticity5,13–19 tobase-controlled growth and further identified the existence of amixed mode regime, where contributions from both the tip andthe base induce dendrite growth.12    Bockris and coworkers proposed the first analytical modelfor dendritic growth for electrodeposition of silver20 and zinc.21They considered ion diffusion limitations at the dendrite tip,calculated a critical overpotential, and predicted the growthvelocity for low and high exchange current densities. Diggie andBockris further extended the model to show transitionsbetween spongy and dendritic zinc electrodeposits under veryhigh overpotentials.21 Aogaki and Makino22 first studiedinstabilities at the electrochemical interface, showed the existence of an ''induction time'' before electrodeposits form, and a''transition time'' (or Sand’s time) when the ions at the interfacedeplete to zero concentration. Chazalviel, Fleury, and Rossoestablished dendrite growth models for dilute electrolytes underlarge electric fields at the dendrite tip.1,23 Dendritic patterns wereattributed to deviations from the electroneutrality condition at theelectrochemical interface. Electrodeposition models specificallyfor rechargeable batteries were put forward by Monroe andNewman,24 who showed that the kinetics of electrodeposit growthwas governed by the Butler–Volmer equation for sub-limitingcurrent densities, a phenomenon that has been repeatedlyobserved experimentally.4,8 Ferrese and Newman further extendedthe model to account for elastic25 and elasto-plastic deformation15in order to predict: (a) the effect of elastic deformation on reactionkinetics, and (b) the thickness of lithium that was redistributed toplastic flow due to a stiff separator. Recent analytical descriptionsidentified the thermodynamic and kinetic regimes of lithiumelectrodeposition and dissolution for non-stressed9 and stressedelectrodeposits under elastic and plastic deformation.12    Thermodynamically consistent variational principles todescribe transport and phase transformation kinetics in electrochemical systems were pioneered by Bishop and Garcı ´a.26,27Guyer and coworkers28 proposed a variational formulation for amulticomponent electrochemical system. A phase field model ofelectrodeposition by Okajima, Shibuta, and Suzuki29 integratedButler–Volmer kinetics and simulated the growth of an electr-odeposit for a very short time (B1 s). The morphology of theelectrodeposit was influenced through a chosen anisotropic interfacial energy. Recent electrodeposition phase field models byChen and coworkers,30 Ely,31 and most recently by Cogswell32demonstrated the interfacial velocity to be a combination of totalfree energy minimization kinetics and Butler–Volmer electrode-position kinetics. Recently, Jokisaari and coworkers33 proposedthe only phase field description that includes elastic energycontributions to demonstrate the shape evolution of an elasticallyconstrained precipitate with anisotropic stiffness coefficients.    In spite of the current progress, a fundamental understanding that explains the different experimentally reported lithiumdendrite morphologies is missing. In this context, a thermody-namically consistent variational framework is developedherein and applied to rationalize the effects of concurrentlyoccurring electrochemistry and large deformation plasticity onthe lithium electrodeposition thermodynamics and kinetics.Lithium morphologies predicted herein are in excellent agreementwith experimental results, demonstrate the underlying drivingforces, and are summarized in dendrite growth maps as a functionof the relevant dimensionless quantitiesMETHOD    Consider a multicomponent electrochemical system comprisedof N charged species, where zi is the valence of each species andOi is its molar volume. The concentration set is describedthrough the notation, {c} = {c1,c2,c3,. . .,cN}, as proposed bySteinbach34 and later by Cogswell.35 x is a non-conserved orderparameter equal to one in the electrodeposit phase and equal tozero in the liquid electrolyte phase and defines the location inthe anode where lithium has been reduced into its solid form.r is the local charge density and f is the local electrostaticpotential. s$ is the local stress tensor and $ee is the local elasticstrain tensor. The total Gibbs free energy of the system isdefined as:    Eqn (1) is in agreement with earlier descriptions by Guyer,28Okajima,29 Chen,36 Garcı ´a,27,31 and Cogswell.32 Here, g({c},x,T) =gs({c},T)p(x) + gl({c},T)(1  p(x)) is the volumetric chemical freeenergy density of mixing, where gs({c},T) is the volumetricchemical free energy density of mixing of the solid electrodeposit and gl({c},T) is that of the liquid electrolyte. The spatialcontributions in each phase are specified through the interpolating function, p(x) = x3(10  15x + 6x2), where p(0) = 0and p(1) = 1. The free energy density of mixing is describedthrough a Redlich–Kister free energy model,     Redlich–Kister coefficient37 and embodies the enthalpiccontributions to the free energy of the electrochemically activematerial. h(x) = x2(1  x)2 and defines minima at x = 0 andx = 1.38,39 Wx is the height of the energy barrier. The term, zx22 ,modulates the energy penalty for the creation of an ele-ctrodeposit-electrolyte interface. Similarly, the term,zij22 , penalizesthe formation of sharp interfaces between two chemical species. The last term in the right side of eqn (1) corresponds to the energy penalty to satisfy r ¼ PNi¼1ziFci=Oi. l(-x) is a Lagrange multiplierAway from equilibrium, spatial inhomogeneities of the variational derivatives of eqn (1) are the driving forces for microstructure evolution, i.e., the kinetic equations of motion:is the diffusivity of the ith species, and Mr/2 = k is the totalelectrical conductivity.27 Further,  The term Oi~Girx accounts for mass deposition or dissolution atthe interface. -vprx and -vp,irci account for convective plasticflow of the solid with a velocity, ~vp ¼ PNp,i is the vectorialplastic velocity of the ith chemical species. In the limit of largestresses and concentration gradients, the microstructural evolutionof the system is described by the corresponding large deformationapproximation of eqn (2), as shown in the Appendix.is the diffusivity of the ith species, and Mr/2 = k is the totalelectrical conductivity.27 Further, Mr ¼ P The term Oi~Giaccounts for mass deposition or dissolution atthe interface. -v prx and -vp,irci account for convective plasticflow of the solid with a velocity, ~vp ¼ Pp,i is the vectorialplastic velocity of the ith chemical species. In the limit of largestresses and concentration gradients, the microstructural evolutionof the system is described by the corresponding large deformationapproximation of eqn (2), as shown in the Appendix.    The elastic energy density, 1$e, suppresses the interfacial deposition rate, as proposed by Newman.48 Thus, for stressed dendrites,higher overpotentials are required for electrodeposition.4,5,48The molar electrodeposition rate is P wherenˆ = rx/|rx|, is the outward normal to the interface witha curvature, K = rnˆ, as previously reported.12,49 The firstterm inside the parenthesis, ziFZ, accounts for the classicaloverpotential induced electrodeposition. The second term1 2 Ois $  $ee, accounts for the shift in critical overpotential dueto elastic energy density localization, as proposed in earlierwork.12 The third term, gOiK, accounts for the Laplace pressureof a curved electrodeposit. Laplace pressure and elasticenergy density counter the overpotential-induced electro-deposition.12,25,48,50 In the absence of stresses and for a planarelectrodeposit, eqn (4) reduces to the classic Butler–Volmerequation.51 In the limit, 1    The chemical species in a lithium electrodeposition system arelithium ions, electrons, salts, and solvents in the electrolyte.Electronic concentration remains uniform in the solid and fullyabsent in the electrolyte phase and hence is trivially solved.    The specific large deformation equations (eqn (5)) for lithiumelectrodeposition are shown in the Appendix.Eqn (1)–(4) were implemented in parallel by applying thefinite element method using open source libraries in Pythonand C++, in the large deformation limit (see Appendix).Electrodeposition calculations were performed by couplingtwo complementary, spatially filling meshes. The first meshcorresponds to the solid electrodeposit, and the second meshcorresponds to the liquid electrolyte. The interfacial electro-deposition flux spatially couples both phases and determineslithium depletion in the electrolyte and an equimolar lithiumdeposition on the solid electrodeposit surface.    At t = 0, a lithium nucleus of radius of 1.33 mm was placed atthe center of the bottom anode surface. The initial radius waschosen such that it was larger than the critical thermodynamicradius (see Table 2). Galvanostatic lithium electrodepositionsimulations from a 1 M LiPF6 in 1 : 1 EC : DMC electrolyte on aninert substrate were performed. Values of material propertiesused are summarized in Table 2. Simulations were carried outon a 2.6 GHz, 28-core, Ubuntu 16.04 workstation with 128 GBof RAM. The numerical tolerance for convergence and thetolerance for the Newton solver were both set to 106. Onehour of electrodeposition simulation took B3 days of wall timeRESULT    Fig. 2 shows the growth of an isolated lithium dendrite at afixed current density of 1 mA cm2. In the initial stages, theelectric field is higher in the liquid electrolyte and nearly zeroinside the highly conducting metallic lithium electrodeposit.The electric field localizes at the electrodeposit tip (see Fig. 2(d–f))and induces an overpotential-induced tip-controlled growth,which in turn induces stress accumulation, as a result of the localmolar volume changes as the solid lithium locally displaces theSEI and the liquid electrolyte in the vicinity of the dendrite tip.Electrodeposition at the tip increases the local elastic energydensity and suppresses subsequent electrodeposition in the verycenter of the stressed region. The local stress inhomogeneities atthe tip cause the primary dendrite to bifurcate into two branches(see Fig. 2(b)). This process repeats itself as the newly formeddendrite tips are directly exposed to the applied current density,thus forming secondary and tertiary branches (see Fig. 2(c)).    As these branches develop, the electrolyte between thecentral branch is electrically shielded (see Fig. 2(f)). This resultsthe major and minor axes, and the orientation is specified bythe principal directions. Results demonstrate that duringthe initial stages of dendrite growth the electrodeposit issubjected to a laterally compressive state of stress that pushesthe lithium nucleus to grow vertically, as proposed by Wangand coworkers,55 Li and Bazant,4,5 Crowther and West,7Tarascon and coworkers,56 Yamaki and Arakawa,6 and mostrecently in analytical work12 (see Fig. 3(a)). In addition, highcompressive stresses in the initial stages induce electrodeposition suppression, in agreement with Newman48 and electrodeposition experiments by Wilkinson and Wainwright.DISCUSSION    As the electrodeposit grows and branches develop, stressescontinuously relax at the base but remain localized at the tip.Growth at this stage is a result of both base-controlled growth atthe bottom and tip-controlled growth at the top and results inan overall mixed growth mode, in agreement with previouswork.12 Further, highly localized elastic energy density atthe tip suppresses electrodeposition at the tip, but favorelectrodeposition and electrodissolution on the side branches(compare Fig. 2(h) and 3(b)). Repeated bifurcations cause theelectrodeposit to develop secondary and tertiary branches.A direct comparison between Fig. 3(c) and 2(f) and (i) showsthree unreported growth mechanisms: (1) closer to the base,where stresses are relaxed and the surfaces of the electrodepositare electrochemically shielded there is practically no electrode-position or electrodissolution; (2) along the length of thelower side branches stresses induce electrodissolution andelectrodeposition on those interfaces directly facing each other,generating a self-sustained overpotential that moves thebranches up; and (3) in those side branches experiencingnon-hydrostatic stresses, local, lateral extrusion is observed.    In contrast, in the absence of any stress effects, the electrodeposits will grow only from the tip, electrochemically shieldingthe back, as a result of electrodeposition at the electrolyte–lithiuminterface, following classical electrodeposition theories57 andas recently demonstrated for lithium.31,49 Further, dendritebranching will solely be a result of diffusion limitations inthe electrolyte and will develop at times t 4 tSand, as reported inthe classical dendrite literature.1,58    Recent analytical work12 shows that for the applied boundaryconditions, the incubation time is t0 B 1 s and the stressrelaxation time is ts B 300 s. Also, for the stress tensor anisotropy, a = s2/s1 B 2, plastic flow is maximal as predicted herein(see Fig. 4(a)). Further, results demonstrate that base-controlledgrowth dominates at the initial stages of electrodeposition,independent of the applied current density. Thus, while electrod-eposition is taking place, growth from both the tip and the baseconcurrently occurs, enabling the development of additional,simultaneously occurring growth mechanisms.    The corresponding shear-induced plastic flow is summarized in Fig. 4.In the initial stages, mass flows towards the topto relax the stresses, much like toothpaste being squeezed outof its tube (see Fig. 4(a)).4,6,12 The streamlines highlight thedirection of local plastic flow. After stresses relax through basec-ontrolled growth, tip electrodeposition further induces stressaccumulation at the tip of the electrodeposit. For currentdensities B1 mA cm2, the electrodeposition rate is faster thanthe plastic flow-induced stress relaxation rate (see Fig. 4(b)).The streamlines show that mass internally flows from high tolow stressed regions and induces dendrite bending. Further,such directional flow stretches the dendrite branches andmakes them susceptible to localized electrodeposition.     Fig. 5 shows the lithium-ion concentration distribution for ahigh current density, iapp = 10 mA cm2. Fig. 5(a) shows theconcentration at t = 300 s. For t 4 tSand = 292 s, the concentrationdrops to zero in the vicinity of the dendrite tip, inthose locations where the local electric field is concentrated,suppressing the local electrodeposition rate (see Fig. 6). Also,results demonstrate that the width of the depletion layer remainsunchanged as the dendrite grows, as shown experimentally byBrissot.3 Crevices between dendrite branches are not lithiumdepleted due to electrochemical shielding. Stress-driven electrode-position/electrodissolution in the side branches that induceslithium depletion in the intervening electrolyte becomes apparent in those branches whose diffusion distance to the counterelectrode is the largest.    Simulation results support the conclusion drawn byBrissot,59 and most recently by Bazant and Li5 that dendriticgrowth under current densities of B10 mA cm2 is a functionof complex, local microstructural heterogeneities rather thandue to long-range diffusion limitations. Analytically, the limiting current density is, ilim = zFDlC0/l = 321 mA cm2, and thecorresponding Sand’s time, tSand ¼ pDl zC0app = 10 mA cm2. This limiting current value is consistentwith the experimentally reported measurements by Brissot(164 mA cm2 for l = 29 mm and 241 mA cm2 for l = 20 mm)59and Cui (152 mA cm2, 198 mA cm2).61 For thicker cells, withl B 300 mm, experimentally reported limiting current densities aresmaller, in the 50–150 mA cm2 range, as reported in severalexperimental and theoretical studies.4,62,63 Thus, the macroscopicapplied current density always lies below the limiting currentdensity but results in dendritic growth, as widely reported inliterature.7,59,63,64    Fig. 6 shows the heterogeneous electric field distributionahead of the dendrite tip, for iapp = 10 mA cm2. Resultsdemonstrate that the local electric field in front of the dendritetip is twice that of the macroscopic electric field for an initialhemispherical electrodeposit (see Fig. 6(a)). As the electrodeposit grows and bifurcates into thinner whiskers, the electricfield at the tip reaches B three times that of the macroscopicvalue (see Fig. 6(c and d)), in agreement with numericalcalculations from Srinivasan and coworkers.65 This suggeststhat the local current density,reaches B30 mA cm2 B0.1ilim in front of the dendrite tips.    Concurrently occurring local electrodeposition and electrodissolution (shown in Fig. 7(c and d)) result in lateral asymmetry of the dendrite arms and make the dendrite proneto bend or develop kinks and thereby change the growthdirection.53 Similarly, once the dendrite branches fully develop,lithium slowly dissolves from the outer regions of the dendritebase (see Fig. 7(d)) and increases the local ionic concentrationin the electrolyte (see Fig. 5(d)). Overall, these results demonstrate that for very high current densities (iapp = 10 mA cm2),diffusion limitations influence the local electrodeposition ratesand change the electrodeposit microstructure heterogeneouslyas a result of local electrochemical gradients. Further, branching ofthe electrodeposit is a result of the competition of concentrationgradients and stresses. High electrodeposition rates inducecompressive stresses at the tip,66 suppress electrodeposition, andenhance electrodeposition on the side branches.    Fig. 8 shows the effect of applied current density on theelectrodeposited microstructure, for fixed total amount ofdeposited charge. For a low current density (0.1 mA cm2),the electrodeposit growth is driven by tip-controlled electrodep-osition, but shaped through plastic flow (see Fig. 8), andresults in planar lithium growth.5,10 For higher current densities (B1 mA cm2), electrodeposition rates dominate over thestress relaxation kinetics and favor the growth of dendritearms, due to elastic energy localization.4,6,55 The morphologiesthat are produced are a result of the joint spatial distribution ofelectrodeposition-controlled regions coupled to the plasticflow induced dendrite growth, in agreement with analyticalresults.12 For very high current densities (B10 mA cm2), stressrelaxation at the tip is slow due to fast mass accretion and thusremains confined at the lower branches. A highly branchedor dendritic morphology develops as a result of both stresslocalization at the tips and concentration gradients ahead ofthe tips.4,11 This heterogeneous electrodeposition forms smallsurficial perturbations that are preferentially electrodepositedand results into thin and long, highly branched, lithiumstructuresCONCLUSION    Fig. 9 summarizes the different regimes of lithium electrode-position as a function of normalized electrodeposit size,ˆr = Dgr/2g B DgV1/3/2g and normalized applied currentdensity. The blue curve denotesthe critical thermodynamic size of the electrodeposit. Lithiumdendrites above the blue curve are stable, while those below theblue curve are unfavorable and will dissolve back into theelectrolyte. Thus, dendritic growth is completely suppressedby charging the cell with current densities in the thermodynamic suppression regime, as proposed earlier,9 and experimentally verified by Cui.8 The black line embodies the kineticlimit for electrodeposits. Between the blue and the black lineis the incubation regime, where stable lithium nuclei growthrough local coarsening kinetics.8,9 To the left of the red line,i.e., for low current densities and above the kinetic limit is thebase-controlled growth regime, where lithium plasticity at thebase dominates microstructural evolution. A critical currentdensity, ˆı* = (zFiliml)/(DgOki) = 2.5  105, defined by the orangeline, (for the chosen material properties, see Table 2), denotesthe onset of the diffusion-controlled or Sand’s regime, wherehighly branched dendritic structures develop due to diffusionlimitations in the electrolyte, in agreement with Bazant et al.4At moderate current densities, in the 103 oˆı o 2.5  105 range,tip-controlled growth occurs through interfacial electrodep-osition kinetics. Between the green and the dashed graylines, the growth rate is suppressed due to elastic energylocalization, and reaches a minimum at the elastic limit oflithium, denoted by the dashed gray line.12 For long depositiontimes, highly localized stresses result in plastic flow at the tipsthat distort and modify the shape of the dendrites, as noted inrecent experiments by Steiger and coworkers.53 Tip branchingfor ˆı o 2.5  105 is driven by elastic energy density localization,while for ˆı 4 2.5  105 is driven by concentration gradients, asobserved in classical dendritic growth. Typical current densitieslie in the 0.1 o ˆı o 100 range, with contributions fromelectrodeposition and elastic-plastic deformation, referredherein as the mixed regime.12 Base-controlled growth inducesinitial columnar growth in the mixed regime, while at laterstages, tip branching is induced by elastic energy densitylocalization and enhanced by concentration gradients.    A direct comparison with experimental microstructures (seeFig. 1 and corresponding markers in Fig. 9) show excellentagreement with the numerical simulations: low current densities result in columnar structures and high current densitiesresult in branched dendritic structures. Further, Fig. 9 showsthat most lithium electrodeposition experiments lie in a narrowstrip in the mixed regime. In order to completely suppressdendritic growth, the electrodeposits should be limited tosmaller sizes, as depicted by the thermodynamic suppressionregime. Thus, dendrite-free lithium anodes are possible bydesigning time-dependent charging patterns that make incursi-ons of length t o min(ts,tSand) into the high current densityregimes, without enabling the electrodeposit to grow beyondthe kinetic limit (black line) and avoid either base-controlled,tip-controlled, or mixed mode of growth. The amplitude of thecurrent density incursions will be a function of the state ofcharge, for larger dendrites will require a shorter characteristictime to develop a morphological instability.    Overall, the analysis performed herein demonstrates thatexperiments can be readily tailored towards establishing correlations between the lithium dendrite morphology, such asdendrite growth direction (angle), dendrite arm spacing, anddeveloping in situ or residual stresses as well as externallyimposed electrical and chemical stimuli by combining Fourieranalyses, classical characterization techniques, and emergentmachine learning algorithms. The combination defines a stepping stone to improve battery life and reliability. In addition,dendrite suppression analyses through applied external pressure, as reported experimentally44,67,68 can be readily modeledby combining the framework developed herein and previousanalytical work,12 and considering the shift of the free energyof formation per unit volume, Dg ! Dg  P2=2E ¼ Dh  TDsand through the Clausius–Clapeyron equation, dP=dT ¼Ds=DV ¼ Dh=ðTDVÞ, to account for the correspondingtemperature-dependent hydrostatic stress-induced phase transformation effectsIn summary, a comprehensive theory has been developedto describe the microstructural evolution of lithium electrodeposits. This theory provides a roadmap to explore andidentify the microstructural mechanisms controlling dendritegrowth. Specifically, stresses on an electrodeposit arise fromthe local molar volume changes, as induced by the SEI layer,from adjoining electrodeposits, from the separator layerthrough the relevant mechanical properties, or those inducedby the cell casing, and externally imposing appropriateboundary conditions that reflect the physical situation at hand.Results suggest that lithium dendrite growth originates from aset of coupled, electrochemomechanical driving forces thatresult in six regimes of behavior: (i) thermodynamic suppression regime, (ii) incubation regime, (iii) base-controlled growthregime, (iv) tip-controlled growth regime, (v) mixed regime,and (vi) Sand’s regime, each referring to a distinct growth (orsuppression) mechanism