Optimal Time Interval Between Periodic Inspections for a Two-Component Cold Standby Multistate SystemAbstract¡ªThe establishment of the optimal time interval be- tween inspections for multistate redundant systems considering availability and costs related to maintenance and production losses is a challenging issue. This paper extends previous research for redundant multistate systems where the time-to-repair cannot be neglected. Discrete-time Markov chains are used to define transition probabilities between the different system states and the costs related to each transition. To optimize the time interval between inspections, the total cost is minimized utilizing the Markov chains properties followed by a numerical search technique. Two models are analyzed and numerical examples are presented. System I is a binary system with cold standby redundancy and component repair, while system II is a multistate system with cold standby redundancy and component repair. The main contribution of the method presented in this paper is the establishment of the optimal time interval between inspections for cold standby systems comprised of components that have different levels of degradation and where the component state can be determined only through periodic inspections. Systems with these characteristics are widely applied in industry, but are still not fully modeled in the literature.I.INTRODUCTION    Although time-based preventive maintenance is a strategy widely applied in industry, it is known that this maintenance approach leads to repair and replacement of components before the end of its useful life, increasing maintenance costs. This fact contributes to foster the interest of organizations and research in the development of models that allows for the use of preventive maintenance based on condition, where different states of system degradation can be observed and the best state for repair and replacement can be established. These systems are called multistate systems (MSSs).    MSSs with different degradation states allow for more accurate component aging prediction, being more realistic than approaches that consider binary states (operating or failed) components. MSS can have several degradation levels, from perfect operation to complete failure. Some examples of MSS are hydraulic bombs in petroleum refineries, software systems, power generation systems, and train engine bearings. MSS may consist of a single component or many components. As the number of states and number of components increases, reliability analyses become much more complex [1].    There are situations where MSSs have one or more components in a cold standby position. In these cases, if continuous monitoring is not possible, periodic inspections are recommended. These inspections verify the state of each component at predetermined times and initiate component repair if a high level of degradation is detected. The time between inspections should be optimized to maximize availability and to minimize costs [2]. Frequent inspections can serve to improve the availability, but involve high costs of preventive maintenance. On the other hand, lengthy times between inspections reduce total costs of inspection, but increase the costs of corrective maintenance and downtime, since there can be a long period when the system is unavailable [3], [4]. The establishment of the optimal time between inspections is essential to ensure the required availability with the lowest cost possible.    Despite recent growth in the number of papers addressing this topic, redundant MSSs have been studied since the 1970s. In one of the first works about this theme, El-Neveihi et al. [5] developed a basic theory for the study of systems with finite number of states. Even though Karpinski [6] established the optimal time interval between periodic inspections for an MSS of a single component using Laplace transforms, most research about MSS consider continuous monitoring, as can be seen in Zhang et al. [7], Hsieh and Chiu [8], and Sheu and Zhang [9]. Also, these approaches study two main problems: 1) the optimal redundancy allocation for system reliability [10], [11], and 2) the optimal time interval for component replacement [9], [12], [13].    Some authors analyzed the reliability of systems with different levels of degradation, but do not classify them specifically as multistate. These authors based their studies on Markov chains methods [14], [15]. However, it was only after the study presented by Levitin and Lisnianski [10], [16] that many studies on redundant MSS emerged utilizing the universal generating function (UGF) method.    At the first moment, these authors developed a method for the joint optimization of redundancies and replacement intervals for MSS using UGF and genetic algorithms [10]. Later, the authors improve the method considering imperfect maintenance [16]. This method has been used along with Markov processes in recent studies concerned with MSS [2], [9], [11], [12], [17], [18].    In addition to Markov process and UGF, some recent studies are applying recursive methods and Lz-transforms method to analyze the reliability and optimize parameters of MSS [19], [9], [20], [21]. The focus of Sheu and Zhang [9] and Lisnianski et al. [21] is optimization of age replacement time and Sheu et al. [19] focus in optimization of preventive maintenance schedule. Most of the studies on MSS analyze complex systems subject to continuous monitoring assuming that repair starts immediately after the failure occurrence. These papers aim to optimize the acquisition, allocation, and redundancy level along with the establishment of the optimal time interval to replacement. Just a few studies consider MSS subject to periodic inspections where the components and system state are verified only at inspections. However, this is a situation observed in many industrial scenarios, especially when the analysis of some component requires local inspection and the access is difficult. In these cases, the components are only monitored periodically.    Le and Tan [22] optimized sequential inspections and continuous monitoring for an MSS assuming instantaneous repair. In this system, inspections are performed after a warning given by a continuous monitoring system, and repair or replacements are performed for the whole system and not for individual components. Lu et al. [20] utilized non-homogeneous continuous-time Markov chains, z transform, and particle swarm optimization to optimize the maintenance threshold and the inspection intervals of an MSS with five maintenance effects. Ruiz-Castro [23] analyzed the performance of an MSS with and without preventive maintenance using Markov process and reward processes algorithmically. This author considers a system subject to internal failures and external shocks with random inspections. Using semi-Markov process and Monte Carlo simulation, Koutras et al. [24] established inspection time and maintenance policies that optimize the dependability and/or performance of an MSS with deterioration.    Considering a binary redundant system with instantaneous repair and constant failure rate, Alebrant Mendes et al. [25] established the optimal time interval between periodic inspections using Markov chain and search technique.    As shown in the previous paragraphs, the interest for studies that address MSS subject to inspections has increased in the last few years. Nevertheless, none of them address the optimization of the time interval between periodic inspections of a system in which the components are only monitored periodically. Also, the application of discrete-time Markov chains to solve such problems is a challenging novelty.    The main contribution of the method proposed in this paper is the analysis of redundant MSS comprised of components that have different levels of degradation that can be determined only through periodic inspections. This configuration is common in systems that cannot be continuously monitored and are difficult to access, such as, internal components of heavy equipment where substantial disassembly effort is necessary to access and verify components. The establishment of the optimal time interval among inspections, considering inspection, failure, and unavailability costs is important to ensure the desired reliability with the lowest cost possible.    The complexity of problems involving redundancies increase when the time-to-repair is considered as a random variable distributed according to some defined parametric distribution. Usually, the authors suppose that repair times are exponentially distributed or fit a phase-type distribution, making the problem solution easier using Markov processes, as seen in Tian et al. [17], Mine and Kawai [26], Liu et al. [11], Lu et al. [20], and Montoro-Cazorla and Perez-Ocon [27].    The study of systems having different levels of degradation using Markov processes also becomes complex as more components and degradation states are added. Soro et al. [28] and Sheu and Zhang [9] took into consideration only the degradation levels of the whole system, reducing the number of variables in the model and allowing the inclusion of many degradation states. In those studies that focused on the degradation states at the component level, as seen in Mokaddis et al. [15], Montoro-Cazorla and Perez-Ocon [27], Jia et al. [29], and Guilani et al. [30], only a few states and components were considered, since increasing the number of states and components substantially increases the number of equations needed to describe the problem.    This paper presents a model for systems with two components, in which one of them is in the cold standby position, and having three levels of degradation besides the failure state. The addition of components into the system increases the number of equations and the space required to describe them, but the model can be generalized and utilized to determine the optimal time interval between inspections of redundant MSS with n components.    The maintenance of a redundant MSS is a stochastic process since it has n components and each component can be in any level of degradation or failure at any time. Each combination of component states represents a likelihood in the state space of a Markov chain process. When periodic inspections are performed, the system state (different levels of degradation or failure) is verified at discrete times (only during the inspections). This scenario justifies the application of discrete-time Markov chains to study such problems.    This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the system, lists the assumptions and notation used, and ex- plains the methodology applied for modeling the problem. In Section III, the problem is solved defining the transition prob- abilities and modeling the costs of the system. In Section IV, numerical examples are presented and analyzed. Section V summarizes the paper and includes concluding remarks.II.METHODOLOGY    This section describes the system modeled and the assumptions accepted.A. System Description    This paper builds upon and extends the method developed by Alebrant Mendes et al. [25] to establish the optimal time interval between periodic inspections. Since the time-to-repair cannot be neglected in many situations, this study first extends the proposed method to incorporate this aspect. Through the inclusion of the time-to-repair in the model, its effect in the system reliability and costs can be analyzed. Next, an additional aspect was modeled. Given that many redundant systems suffer degradation during operation, and that, in many cases, the degradation level can be verified through inspections, the method was extended to accommodate MSS and inspection. The systems analyzed in this study are presented next.    These systems reflect real systems installed in a petrochemical company that operates in southern Brazil. This is a large company comprising several operational systems, many of them 1) in a difficult-to-inspect position (demanding some disassembling for inspection) and 2) protected by redundancy. The operating condition of some of these difficult-to-inspect systems cannot be properly evaluated and, as far as detection is concerned, they change directly from operational to failed state (as system I described next). The operating condition of other difficult-to- inspect systems, however, may be evaluated and a maintenance decision may be taken based on that evaluation (as system II de- scribed next). Regarding the numerical example (presented in Section IV), in order to protect confidential information, the real numbers concerning costs, mean time between failures (MTBF), and mean time-to-failure (MTTF) were modified, but the aver- age proportion [between MTBF/mean time-to-repair (MTTR) and among costs] observed in the petrochemical company was preserved.    a) System I ? Binary system with cold standby redundancy and component repair    In this system, one component is active and the other is in a cold standby position. When the active component fails, the cold standby component is instantaneously activated. During the periodic inspection, the binary state (operational, failed) of each component is verified and component repairs are per- formed when necessary. Time-to-repair is a random variable and the system operates unprotected (without redundancy) until the repair is completed. The repaired components return to the system in the cold standby position. The system fails when both components fail between two consecutive inspections or if one component fails while the other is under repair.    b) System II ? Multistate system with cold standby redundancy and component repair    In this system, one component is also active and the other is in a cold standby position. Each component has, besides the failure state, three different operational states related to its degradation level:    1) excellent (e) ? component is operating in a perfect state;    2) good (g) ? component is operating in a good state, but it is possible to verify some level of degradation; and    3) poor (p) ? component is still operating, but in an advanced state of degradation, being recommended performing a repair to avoid failure.    Components move from excellent to good and from good to poor, and if not repaired, from poor to failure state. Components never fail before passing through all levels of degradation. However, the system can pass through more than one state and fail between two consecutive inspections. When the active component fails, the cold standby component is instantaneously activated and experiences the same degradation levels of the previous component. A component is sent to repair if a poor or failure state is detected during inspection.C. Assumptions    This study has the following assumptions for system I:    1) components have only two states (operating or failed);    2) perfect and instantaneous switching;    3) times-to-failure follow an exponential probability distribution;    4) components have different parameters for the probability distribution of times-to-failure and equal parameters for the probability distribution of times-to-repair;    5) components in cold standby position do not degrade or fail;    6) each inspection is perfectly and instantaneously performed; and    7) perfect repair.    For System II, the assumptions are:    1) components degrade incrementally, experiencing all degradation states before fail;    2) perfect and instantaneous switching;    3) times-to-transition between degradation states and times-to-repair fit an exponential probability distribution;    4) components have different parameters for the probability distribution of times-to-transition and equal parameters for the probability distribution of times-to-repair;    5) components in cold standby position do not degrade or fail;    6) each inspection is perfectly and instantaneously performed; and    7) perfect repair.    This study analyzes systems where failures are neither detected nor repaired until an inspection is performed. If the system failure occurs before the inspection, the downtime results in an increase of costs. These costs increase until the next inspection. When the system is still working and a component failure is detected, the component is repaired (with an associated cost and time) to preserve the reliability level. In system II, if inspection detects a poor condition, the component is also repaired (with an associated cost and time) to prevent system failure.    Markov chains are an attractive model for this class of problem because complex behavior can be represented efficiently, and an appropriate mathematical model developed and used to optimize design or maintenance. However, it should also be clearly stated that use of Markov chains requires a series of assumptions that are mostly appropriate and reasonably accurate. There may be cases where the assumptions simply are not valid and the models proposed in this paper should not be applied. For example, when a repair is ongoing and an inspection occurs, it is assumed that the random repair time begins again.    Exponential probability distributions were used to facilitate the use of Markov chains. The exponential distribution is appropriate and convenient to model times-to-failure, times-to-repair, and times-to-state transition for many components. However, if it is not the case, other approaches, such as Monte Carlo simulation, should be utilized.III. RELIABILITY AND COST ANALYSIS OF REDUNDANT SYSTEMS SUBJECT TO PERIODIC INSPECTIONS    In this section, the transition probabilities for the two systems are developed using Markov chains. Next, the costs related to system maintenance are determined and a cost function is developed and minimized to find the optimal time interval between inspections.A. Definition of Transition Probabilities Using Discrete-Time Markov Chains    A Markov chain is a process consisting of a finite number of states and known transition probabilities pij , where pij is the probability of transitioning from state i to state j. The probabilities pij depend only on states i and j, not depending on the time or previous number of transitions n or the previous states visited. The set of states in a Markov chain process is called state space [31].    Considering that each different configuration possible to be found during an inspection is a state and that transition times from one to another state are random variables, it is possible to define a state space diagram for both systems being studied, as presented next in this paper.    Every time a periodic inspection is performed, the system state is verified. Once in a failure state, the system does not change to another state anymore. Each state of system failure is an absorbing state of the Markov chain. The state space diagram and the transition matrix of each system are presented as follows.     The model corresponds to two-component systems. In theory, a corresponding Markov chain could be developed for larger systems with more components, but practically, it would become inefficient and cumbersome. Therefore, for larger systems, alternative models might be more practical. Stochastic Petri nets and Monte Carlo simulation have demonstrated much promise for problems of this type    a) System I ? Binary system with cold standby redundancy and component repair: The state space diagram for system I is presented in Fig. 1. The circles Sn represent each state from the state space. Each letter inside the circles represents the com- ponent state: operating (O), standby (S), repair (R), or failure (F). Each number associated with each letter inside the circles represents one component (1 and 2). For example: the state S0 has the component 1 in operating state O1 and the component 2 in cold standby state S2. The states S6, S7, and S8 represent system failure and are absorbing states for the purpose of this study.    The matrix P1, in Appendix B, shows the transition prob- abilities for system I. For example, the probability p30 is the probability of transitioning from state 3 to state 0. This prob- ability is the probability of component 2 being repaired and component 1 being operative during the time interval between inspections.    Since the time-to-failure (TTF) of the active component, the time when the standby component starts to operate, and the time- to-repair are random variables, standard probability theory was used to determine these probabilities. For example, the probability p30 of transitioning from state 3 to state 0 can be determined as the probability of the time-to-repair of component 2 being smaller than the time interval between inspections combined with the probability of the TTF of component 1 being higher than the time interval between inspections: Pr R2 < ¦Ó T1 > ¦Ó  . These probabilities are expressed by 15 equations. Equations (1)?(7) are presented next. The other equations can be checked in Appendix A.    1) Probability of component 1 remaining operational during the time interval between inspections:    2) Probability of component 1 having failed and component 2 starting to operate but not failing during the time interval between inspections:    3) Probability of components 1 and 2 failing during the time interval between inspections:    4) Probability of component 2 remaining operational during the time interval between inspections:    5) Probability of component 2 having failed and component 1 starting to operate but not failing during the time interval between inspections:    6) Probability of component 1 being repaired and component 2 remaining operational during the time interval between inspections:    7) Probability of component 1 being repaired before component 2 fails, given that the component 2 fails and component 1 starts to operate during the time interval between inspections:    Considering (1)?(7) presented here and (32)?(39) presented in Appendix A, P1 can be rewritten. The matrix P1 can be checked in Appendix B.    b) System II ? Multistate system with cold standby redundancy and component repair: The state space diagram for system II is presented in Fig. 2. The circles Sn represent each state from the state space. Each letter inside the circles represents the component state: operating in an excellent state (Oe), operating in a good state (Og), operating in a poor state (Op), cold standby (S), repair (R), or failure (F). Each number associated with each letter inside the circles represents one component (1 and 2). For example, the state S0 has component 1 operating in excellent state O1e and component 2 in cold standby state S2.    Fig. 2 shows that there are 21 possible states (S0 to S20) in the state space of system II. The state of the components of each system state is presented in Fig. 3.    The system starts with component 1 operating in an excellent state and component 2 in a cold standby position. The system can stay in the same state or move to another state. Repair of failed components starts just after the next periodic inspection. Components in a poor state of operation are also sent to repair after the periodic inspection, if the other component is available to operate. If the other component is being repaired, no action is taken during the periodic inspection. However, if the other component is in a failure state, the failed component is sent to repair during the periodic inspection. In both cases, the system stays operating with the component in a poor state.    Times-to-repair of each component vary according to their probability distribution. The system fails when all components fail during the time interval between inspections or if a component fails while the other component is being repaired. After failure, the system is not repaired. Thus, states S18, S19, and S20 are absorbing states.    Matrix P2 (see Appendix B) presents the transition probabilities of the system. The probabilities in matrix P2 were solved using probability theory. For example, the probability p4,15 is the probability of component 1 being repaired before component 2 having failed and, in the sequence, component 2 failing and component 1 degrading until the poor state of operation, during the time interval between inspections. This probability can be calculated through the combination of three probabilities:    1) probability of the time-to-repair of component 1 being smaller than the sum of the times-to-degradation and failure of component 2;    2) probability of the sum of times-to-degradation and failure of component 2, plus the time-to-degradation of component 1 until the good state of operation, being smaller than the time interval between inspections; and    3) probability of the sum of times-to-degradation and failure of component 2, plus the times to component 1 degrading until the poor state of operation, being higher than the time interval between inspections:    The calculation of these probabilities follows the same methodology used to solve the probabilities of system I. Some probabilities and their solution in terms of integral equations are presented in the following. The probabilities were solved using the software MATLAB 7.9 R2009b.    The system has a total of 79 equations that represent the states transition probabilities. Two examples of these probabilities and their solutions are presented next:    1) Probability of component 2 degrading and failing after component 1 has been repaired and component 1 starting to operate and degrading from the excellent state to the poor state of operation, during the time interval between inspections:    2) Probability of component 2 degrading from the excellent state to the poor state of operation and component 1 remaining under repair, during the time interval between inspections:B. Cost Models    Optimizing the measure of performance per unit of time is equivalent to optimizing the measure of performance over a long period. Thus, the cost models in this paper are based in the establishment of the maintenance total cost per cycle. In this application, a cycle is the period of time elapsed from the beginning of the system operation until its failure:    Four elements were considered to determine the costs associated with the redundant system subject to periodic inspections:    1) cost of periodic inspection (Ci);    2) cost of component repair (Cr);    3) cost of downtime per time (Cp); and    4) cost of system repair (Cs).    The cost of periodic inspections comprises costs of manpower, tools and materials required to perform the inspection, even if there are no components in the failure state. The cost of component repair includes costs of manpower, tools, replacement of parts, and materials utilized to repair failed component. The cost of system repair is related to costs incurred to reactivate the system to its completely operational condition after a system failure. Finally, the cost of downtime refers to the production losses during the time that the system is down. This cost includes the loss of sales opportunity and monetary fees for delivery delay.    The costs of periodic inspection, component repair, and system repair are assumed to be constants and must be determined for each system individually. On the other hand, the cost of downtime is a function of time, because losses increase along with the length of system unavailability. To establish this cost, it is necessary to determine the expected downtime.    For a binary system (system I) comprised of two components (1 and 2) in parallel, in which one component is in cold standby position and both components have times-to-failure that follow an exponential probability distribution, the mean time to system failure (MTTFij ), given that the system is in state i and goes to state j that is a failure state, is calculated as:    For an MSS (system II) comprised of two components (1 and 2), in which one component is in cold standby position and both components have times-to-transition that follow an exponential probability distribution, the mean time to system failure (MTTFij ), given that the system is in state i and goes to state j that is a failure state, is calculated as following. The letters associated with the parameter ¦Ë represent the component operation state:    Consider a system having only one component with times-to-transition following an exponential distribution. Supposing that this component does fail during the time interval between inspections (¦Ó) and that this interval is relatively small when compared with the expected TTF, the expected downtime would be:    Consider a system with two components where times-to- transition follow an exponential distribution. Supposing that these components both fail during the time interval between inspections (¦Ó) and that this interval is relatively small when compared with the expected TTF, the approximated expected downtime would be:    Equations (25) and (26) are approximations that are appropriate when the time interval between inspections is smaller than the expected time to system failure, as usual in industry. Exact relations could be derived based on a truncated conditional distribution. However, this approximation is useful for the purpose of this study, given the complexity of the cost rate model.    The approximations in (25) and (26) are based on three observations:    1) all transitions related to downtime are associated with a system failure, so the expected downtime is conditional on the occurrence of a system failure (all components in operation in the beginning of the interval fail),    2) the occurrence of failures in a cold standby system is modeled as a homogeneous Poisson process with rate ¦Ëi until the last component fails, and    3) the probability of more than one failure for a Poisson process with rate ¦Ëi is small for an interval shorter than the expected time to system failure.    Combining 2) and 3) it is possible to approximate the occurrence of exactly n failures during the interval, where n is the number of components working in the beginning of the time interval between inspections. For a Poisson process, the expected occurrence of a particular number of failures is distributed uniformly in a fixed interval. So, for n = 1, the expected TTF is ¦Ó /2 and downtime is estimated as ¦Ó /2 + MTTR. For n = 2, the expected times-to-failure are ¦Ó /3 and 2¦Ó /3, where the second fail represents the system fail and downtime is estimated as ¦Ó /3+ MTTR. When the time intervals between inspections become longer than the expected TTF, observation 3) does not hold and this approximation is not appropriate.    As the time interval between inspections increases, the expected downtime becomes longer than the system MTTF and the approximations used previously are no longer appropriate. For ¦Ó >MTTFij, the expected downtime can be approximated using (¦Ó MTTFij) + MTTR. As a result, the expected downtime for all cases can be approximated by:    where n is the number of components that are in an operational condition at the beginning of the interval between inspections.    When the inspection interval becomes much larger or much smaller than the expected failure time, the approximation in (27) converges to the exact solution, and for other cases it provides a reasonable approximation that is practical and efficient. If a decision maker desires an exact solution, a more rigorous probability model could potentially be developed [31]. However, for most applications, there is unlikely to be a detectable difference in the optimal inspection intervals selected.    The cost matrix of each system is presented next. The costs showed in the matrices represent the costs incurred for each transition between two states in the respective system state space. For both systems, for each inspection, cost of inspection is computed. Whenever a component fails, cost of repair is added to the model. Whenever the whole system fails, the cost of inspection, cost of system repair, and cost of downtime are summed. The matrices C1 and C2 show the costs for systems I and II.    After determining the costs involved in each redundant system subject to periodic inspections, it is necessary to combine these costs to establish the total cycle cost. This total cost can be calculated utilizing the discrete-time Markov chain properties. Accordingly to these properties, the expected number of times that the process passes in the transient state j, given that it started in the transient state i, is given by the matrix N [see (28) at the bottom of the page], where Q is the transient part of matrix P [31].    Since the sum of each line in N reveals the expected number of discrete time steps before absorption, given that the chain began in the ith non-absorbing state, and using the probabilities and costs for each transition, the expected cost in a cycle can be calculated by:    The length of the cycle depends on how many times the system goes from state 0 to the other states and how long the time between inspections is. Then, it is possible to calculate the expected length of the cycle by:    Based on (29) and (30), the total cost as a function of ¦Ó can be rewritten as:    The total cost in (31) can be minimized and the optimal time interval between inspections can be established setting values for the costs of inspection, component repair, downtime, and system repair. Since the time interval between inspections is the only variable in the equations, it is possible to determine the minimum total cost using numerical search techniques.    Genetic algorithms as other meta-heuristic search algorithms could be utilized to obtain solutions for this problem, but this approach was not necessary. This problem has a relatively complex objective function of costs, but its optimization is performed for only one decision variable: time interval between inspections. Consequently, a simple one-dimensional numerical search is sufficient. As this model is extended, there will be more advanced multivariable problems requiring methods such as genetic algorithms.NUMERICAL EXAMPLES    Numerical examples for each system studied are presented and analyzed next. For comparison purposes, identical parameters of costs and time-to-repair were utilized in both systems. Equivalent parameters of MTTF were considered. The MTTF of each component in system I (1¦Ë1 and 1¦Ë2), which is a binary system, is equivalent to the sum of mean times-to-transition between states excellent to good, good to poor, and poor to failure of each component in system II (1¦Ë1e + 1¦Ë1g + 1¦Ë1p and 1¦Ë2e + 1¦Ë2g + 1¦Ë2p), assuming that the system is not inspected and repaired.    The parameters values were determined to represent real systems scenarios. Despite being similar, components often have failure rates that are different. The cost parameters utilized are selected based on real scenarios where the cost of inspection and component repair is smaller than the cost of system repair and downtime. Figs. 4 and 5 show the total cost per cycle per month and the optimal time interval between inspections in days for systems I and II, respectively. The parameters utilized were:    1) System I?Different parameters of exponential distribution for times-to-failure for each component: ¦Ë1= 0.005, ¦Ë2=0.006 (these parameters represent MTTFs of 200 and 166.67 days, respectively).    2) System II ? Different parameters of exponential distribution for times-to-transition between different states of degradation for each component: ¦Ë1e=0.02, ¦Ë1g=0.01, ¦Ë1p=0.021, ¦Ë2e=0.025, ¦Ë2g=0.015, and ¦Ë2p=0.026 (these parameters represent MTTFs of 200 and 166.67 days).    3) Equal parameters of exponential distribution for times-to- repair: ¦Á1 and ¦Á2=0.05.    4) Ci=10 000 and Cr=30 000: cost of component repair is higher than cost of inspection.    5) Cs=100 000 and Cp=100 000/units per day: downtime cost is higher than the other costs. It means that unavailability incurs higher costs than those associated with inspection and repair. See the equation shown at the top of the next page.    Fig. 4 shows that the time interval between inspections that minimize the total cost for system I is 14 days. In the same way, Fig. 5 shows that the optimal time interval between inspections for system II is 28 days. Even with equivalent MTTFs, the optimal value for the time interval between inspections is quite different between the two systems presented. The binary system has a higher minimum total cost and requires a time interval be- tween inspections smaller than the MSS. This happens because in system II it is possible to identify an advanced level of degradation and perform the repair before the failure has happened. This reduces the costs related to system failure and downtime.    Moreover, results show that the model developed for the optimization of binary systems is not effective for MSSs. The analysis of MSSs assuming that they have a similar behavior to binary systems can lead to an unnecessary reduction of times interval between inspection and a consequently increase of the total costs.    A sensitivity analysis was conducted to analyze the effect of different parameters (¦Ë1e, ¦Ë1g, ¦Ë1p, ¦Ë2e, ¦Ë2g, ¦Ë2p, ¦Á1, ¦Á2, Ci, Cr, Cs, and Cp) in the total cost per cycle of system II. Fig. 6 presents six graphs. Fig. 6(a) and (b) shows the effect of ¦Á in system with different parameters of ¦Ë1e, ¦Ë1g, ¦Ë1p, ¦Ë2e, ¦Ë2g, ¦Ë2p. Fig. 6(c), (d), and (f) shows the effect of Ci, Cr, Cs, and Cp, on the total cost and the optimal time interval between inspections.    Accordingly to Fig. 6(a), higher repair rates (¦Á) increase the minimum CT while the optimal times interval between inspections remain approximately the same. When Fig. 6(b) is com- pared with Fig. 6(a), it shows that smaller rates of degradation and failure reduce the system total cost. Fig. 6(c) shows that higher costs of inspection (Ci) cause higher minimum CTs and times interval between inspections. Fig. 6(d) demonstrates that costs of repair (Cr) have a small effect on CT and that this effect does not change over the range of ¦Ó. Fig. 6(e) demonstrates that costs of system repair (Cs) also have a small effect on CT. Finally, Fig. 6(f) shows the effect of costs of downtime on the minimum CT. Costs of downtime have a higher effect on minimum CT and this effect increases when ¦Ó increases.    There are two ways to generalize the solution of the problem presented in this paper to consider systems consisting of a larger number of components:    1) the exact solution can be obtained via Markov chains by implementing in software the same reasoning presented in this paper for the two-component systems. Software support would enable to cope with systems constituted by a larger number of components, since the software could handle the hundreds or thousands of transition states that would be established in cases involving a larger number of components.    2) An approximate solution could be obtained using Monte Carlo simulation. The Monte Carlo simulation would have an important advantage related to the possibility of assuming any probability distribution for the variables involved. In any case, it is worth mentioning that safety systems usually have a backup (as the problem presented in this paper), but a relatively small number of backups, usually two, three, or four components in parallel. This makes it feasible, though laborious, to develop a software or to structure a Monte Carlo simulation.    Aiming to solve the generalization problem by simulation, discrete event simulation approach could be used to develop the simulation framework along with Monte Carlo simulation to generate the random numbers that represent the probabilities that are characteristic of stochastic processes. The distributions parameters and the costs variables would be the simulation input parameters. As output, we would have the systems TTF, the numbers of inspections and repairs, and the total cost per cycle. The variables of the simulation would be:    1) the time variable t (referring to the amount of time that has elapsed until the end of the simulation) would be represented by the system TTF;    2) the counter variables would be the number of inspections, number of repairs, and time of operation; and    3) system state variable (that describes the system state at t) would be all the system states possible to be found during a periodic inspection.    The periodic inspections would be the events when the values of the variables would be changed or updated and relevant out- put would be collected. The random variables generated through Monte Carlo simulation would be used to represent the probabilities of the distributions of times-to-transition and times-to- repair. Having the probability, it would be possible to determine the distribution matching time that represents a random time-to- transition or time-to-repair. Every time, when we run the simulation, we would get as output an independent random variable that would have always the same probability distribution. The average of these values would be then used as an approximator of our variable of interest. In order to have a quality approximator and an acceptable error, it would be necessary to run the simulation many times and collect an appropriate number of random variables. The logic that would be needed to build the simulation is similar to the logic developed to solve the problem using Markov Chains. However, the equations that would be needed to be solved are much simpler, because it would not have integral or differential calculations.V. CONCLUSION    This paper presented a model to establish the optimal time interval between periodic inspections for MSS with redundancy in cold standby position utilizing discrete-time Markov chains.    MSS in which different states of degradation are identified captures in detail the component aging, representing in a better perspective many of real situations than other approaches that consider systems as binary (operating or failure state). When continuous monitoring is not possible, periodic inspections are required. During these inspections, component states are verified and repair is started when a failure state or an advanced state of degradation has been detected. The time interval between inspections must be optimized to minimize costs. Frequent inspections improve the system availability, but require higher costs of preventive maintenance. On the other hand, long periods be- tween inspections reduce the costs associated with inspections, but also increase the costs of corrective maintenance, downtime, and costs related to safety accidents. The establishment of an optimal time interval between inspections is important to ensure satisfactory system availability along with the lowest cost possible.    The method presented in this paper uses discrete-time Markov chains to define both the transition probabilities between system states and the costs related to each transition. To optimize the time interval between inspections, the total cost of maintenance was modeled and minimized using the Markov chains properties and a numerical search technique. The minimal cost and the optimal time interval between inspections were obtained taking into consideration the costs of unavailability (downtime) and maintenance (inspection, component repair, and system repair).    Two redundant systems in cold standby position were modeled and numerical examples for systems comprised of two components were presented: 1) System I ? Binary system with cold standby redundancy and component repair; 2) System II?MSS with cold standby redundancy and component repair. Results reveal that the binary system has a minimum total cost higher and requires a time interval between inspections smaller than the MSS. This happens because in MSS it is possible to identify advanced levels of degradation and perform the repair before system failure. This reduces the dominant costs related to downtime. Results also show that the model developed for the optimization of binary systems is not effective for MSS. The analysis of MSS assuming they have the same behavior of binary systems conducts to an unnecessary reduction of time intervals between inspection and a consequently increase of the total costs.    This model pertained to a system with cold standby redundancy. An analogous model could also be developed for active redundancy, or in an extended research effort, a system using both active and cold standby together.    For future research directions, one promising option would be the establishment of the optimal number of redundant components for an MSS comprised of identical components, aiming to achieve predetermined reliability requirements. Also, a model with imperfect maintenance or immediate detection of failures would be interesting and practical for some applications. Furthermore, an interesting improvement in the model developed could be the assumption of the cost of repair as a function of time. This would represent the inclusion of another random variable into the model.    