
Keywords:
Wind energy
Wind turbine monitoring Wind farm monitoring Control chart
SCADA monitoring Statistical inertia

Abstract

A method for monitoring wind turbine generators (WTG) using data provided by the SCADA system is proposed. This method relies mainly upon comparing one WTG with the average of all remaining WTGs on a wind farm. Because environmental conditions on a wind farm are roughly the same over its entirety, the difference between each WTG and the average of the remaining WTGs on the wind farm is constant over time. The statistical inertia of averaged conditions for the entire farm provides a good yardstick for WTG monitoring. The results of monitoring four aspects of a WTG are presented here: these are electrical energy produced; tower vibration; nacelle yaw; and gearbox temperature. Control charts are used to detect abnormal behaviour. With regard to the electrical energy produced, one accidental activation of a curtailment algorithm was found. For tower vibration, we describe an application for the detection of rotor imbalance. For yaw, an example showing detection of nacelle drift is covered. Lastly, for gearbox temperature, the proposed methodology succeeded in detecting an issue two months prior to failure. We have included limitations as to the minimum wind farm size required in order to use the wind farm average. A centralized control chart is also proposed.

1. Introduction

During the life time of a Wind Turbine Generator (WTG), many events can affect its performance. These events can be classi?ed according to the time scale on which they occur. Faults such as blade-angle asymmetry or generator over-speed generally affect the produced electrical energy for hours. Downtime resulting from changing or repairing a principal component such as a main bearing or a gearbox can last for days, even weeks [1]. Other events such as blade erosion build up over months and years. The effect of such events on power output can also be divided in two categories: events that partially reduce the production (e.g.: icing, blade erosion) and others that stop the WTG (e.g.: faults, downtime for repairs). Preventing these events or limiting their duration is an important aspect of wind farm operation and maintenance (O&M). The ageing of WTGs is now a timely topic for the wind industry, since many wind farms in Canada and around the world have been in service for decades. With time, failure of components is more frequent and underperformances can appear. Some authors are reporting a performance reduction rate of approximately 1.5% per year [2]. Also, some operators are even considering the option of repowering, as their farms are getting closer to the end of their planned lifetimes, or as new WTG models, signi?cantly larger than the ones built decades ago, become available [3]. Thus, various monitoring method are used to improve availability of WTGs and to achieve condition based maintenance. The ageing of the wind farms also motivates interest in the great amount of data available for the development of monitoring tools.
The objective of this paper is to propose a data-driven method to monitor wind farm WTGs base on the long term, which is also robust and suitable for the industry. Here, control charts are used for the generation of alarms. Unlike most other monitoring methods, the proposed methodology can be used to monitor a wide range of WTG components or aspects. It is also simple to under- stand and use: no advanced knowledge in data mining or modeling is required. Thus, the proposed methodology is suitable for indus- trial applications. Furthermore, this method allows for the moni- toring of various aspects of a WTG simultaneously, with the help of a centralized control chart. This method is suitable for medium and large wind farms (more than 25 WTGs). Since the number of units per wind farm is constantly rising, this method is can be applicable to most cases.
First, previous work on the monitoring of WTGs will be reviewed. Then the proposed method will be detailed, followed by the results of its application to industrial wind farms. The method used here for monitoring a wind farm is based on comparing a single WTG with the average of the other WTGs on the same wind farm. The effectiveness of this approach will be demonstrated by means of four separate industrial study cases.

2. Literature review

One way of increasing the reliability and availability of wind energy is by monitoring WTGs. With proper monitoring, failures can be avoided and their consequent down-times limited, all of which increases availability. Maintenance can be planned ef?- ciently, and replacement parts can be ordered before failure occurs. There are various ways of performing the monitoring of a WTG. These can be classi?ed as follows: condition monitoring systems (CMS); Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) moni- toring; power curve monitoring; and fault prediction.

2.1. Condition monitoring systems

Condition monitoring systems (CMS) involve the use of addi- tional sensors that evaluate the health of WTG components. They are often based on vibration analyses and use methods such as wavelet analysis or Fourier transformations. They can achieve great precision by predicting the failure of a component months before it happens [4] [5] [6]. However, installing additional sensors can be costly in large wind farms [7]. CMS may also include oil analysis, thermography, shock pulse methods, acoustic emissions and ul- trasonic techniques, as reviewed in Ref. [5].

2.2. SCADA monitoring

SCADA monitoring is the monitoring of a WTG using the data provided by its SCADA system and does not need the use of addi- tional sensors [7]. This monitoring method is limited by the data SCADA provides. Often it is component temperature that is analyzed via SCADA monitoring [8]. In some cases, models are used in order to predict component behaviour [4] [9] and in other cases, the monitoring can be based on the signal itself (mean values, standard deviation, slopes, root mean square, spectrum, etc.) Power curve monitoring can be viewed as a subset of SCADA monitoring. Power curve monitoring is based on the relationship  between wind speed and power output. A change in behaviour of a WTG may be re?ected by its power curve [10] [11] [12] [13]. This method of monitoring can be powerful for the detection of small, progres-
sive underperformances [14].
However, power curve monitoring relies upon measurement of wind speed. According to IEC (International Electrotechnical Commission) 64100-12-1 [15], wind speed shall be provided by a met mast in order to assess the performance of a WTG as a function of freestream speed. But since wind farms have only a few met masts, nacelle wind speed is used instead in power curve moni- toring. In fact, the important point is to obtain a reliable, repeatable and representative wind speed measurement. Therefore, the power curves, using nacelle wind speeds, can be used for monitoring. However, a major ?aw in power curve monitoring is that any change in nacelle anemometry can create a considerable shift in the power curve. Fig. 1 illustrates a change in nacelle power curve following various changes in nacelle anemometry. These power curves were obtained with the bin method described in IEC's 64100-12-1 standard, while using nacelle anemonetry [15].  A noteworthy dif?culty while monitoring a WTG's components using power curve monitoring, is that often, their failure will be seen in the power output after a critical point is reached.

2.3. Fault monitoring

Another type of monitoring is the prediction of faulty behav- iours in a WTG. As de?ned by Ref. [16], a fault occurs when a parameter of a system deviates from standard conditions, such as blade angle asymmetry, component over-temperature or generator over-speed. Operational data are analyzed by means of complex algorithms in order to predict or even avoid the shutdown of the WTG [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22]. Faults monitoring methods can be classi?ed into two categories: model-based and signal-based [16]. In the ?rst case, a model is used to predict the value of a parameter and the predicted value is compared to the observed value in order to ?nd abnormal behaviours. For the signal based approach, fea- tures of the signal are studied. These features may be in the time domain (mean, root mean squarre, gradient) or frequency domain (spectrum) [16] [23]. Fault monitoring also includes fault-tolerant control, where a system analyses the severity of the fault  and takes appropriate action (compensation, controller recon?guration, etc) [16].
Fault prediction is especially important for offshore wind farms, where access to the WTG is more dif?cult than onshore wind farms. High frequency data (~1 Hz) must be available for use in predicting faults; often, additional sensors or complex models, or algorithms are used as well. The types of conditions the control system of a WTG uses in order to detect faulty behaviour requires input to remain above a certain threshold for a few seconds or minutes. Some work has also been done on the development of a WTG controller that can be optimized according to the conditions of the WTGs subset in order to avoid faults. Used components or component subsets may act differently from their nominal behav- iour and thus, the optimal control strategy should be revised [22]. For more on fault monitoring and diagnosis, see Refs. [16] and [23]. The monitoring methods detailed above can all be useful in the O&M of a wind farm. Operators might consider using a combina- tion of these methods, as each evaluate the condition of a different
aspect of their WTG, based on different criteria.

3. Data source
The data used to develop and test the proposed method was taken from ?ve industrial wind farms located in Canada. All the WTGs were the same model and were MW class and pitch regu- lated. Each wind farm contained over 50 WTGs. While the data was recorded at a frequency of 1 Hz, ten-minute averages are used. This averaging limits the noise in the signals and is the norm in the wind power industry, as suggested by the IEC standard [15]. The database has been in service since 2009, which is of interest for long-term monitoring. No CMS were installed on the WTGs. Available values included (online, repair, maintenance, curtailment, etc.) Because there was no mea- surement of principal-component vibration, monitoring methods using these values could not be used. Extreme values correspond- ing to obvious instrumentation malfunction have been removed from the database. Fig. 2 illustrates the data available and the data acquisition process. Here the acquisition and archiving system is the PI system from OSISoft. There is a local server in each wind farm, linked with an Internet connection to a main server. This redundancy allows to archive data even in the eventuality of connection losses with the main server and the on-site server. The
Fig. 1. Example of shifts in power curve caused by instrumentation. On the left, the effect of a faulty anemometer and on the right, the effect of the anemometer type.
Fig. 2. Available data and data acquisition process.

4. Method

The proposed method for monitoring the WTGs on a wind farm compares each WTG's behaviour with the mean of the other WTGs' behaviour on the wind farm. This method is data-driven and empirical based. No models are used.
The behaviour of a WTG constantly ?uctuates due to the various productive WTGs. However, this difference should be constant in time, the same assumptions are made in Ref. [24], where a moni- toring method using wind farm power curves is presented. Thus, the difference between a speci?c WTG and the average of the remaining WTGs on the wind farm should be statistically constant in time.
the difference with the mean of the others,, can be
expressed by the following relation in its environment (wind speed, wind direction, air density,

ambient temperature, etc.). However, all WTGs on a wind farm are
relatively affected by the same environmental variations, since weather conditions are roughly the same over the entire wind farm. Some WTG will perform better, depending on the con?guration of the wind farm. Because physical quantities such as the components and structural vibrations and component temperatures are pro- portional to power output, their values will be higher in the most

This calculation is made at 10 min intervals for which the WTG is available. The rest of the ?eet's average, or the average of all other WTGs on the wind farm, is in fact the average of all the other available WTGs (N(t)). Units under maintenance, curtailment, repair or other production limiting state should not be included in calculating the average for the remaining WTGs on the wind farm, as these are not in operation at that time.
In the case of industrial wind farms, since there are many WTGs,
the ?eet average is a robust value. Small, instantaneous variations

of statistical hypotheses, this implies the need to test two hy- potheses. The ?rst test is on the expected value for Dxi,j(t). The null hypothesis (H1) is that the expected value, E  Dxi;j  t   , is a constant
(m?0?). The alternate hypothesis (H1) is that the expected value is not or change in behaviour of any one WTG will not affect the moni- toring of the other WTGs. Fig. 3 illustrates the calculation method
for the Dxi,j(t). The minimal size required by a wind farm will be constant. discussed in Section 6.
A change in Dxi,j(t) implies a change in the behaviour of the physical quantity j of the WTG i. It is easier to detect an abnormal wind  farm's  environment  or  by any seasonal  effect  are removed
while calculating the difference between the WTG and the average of all others WTGs. Due to the stochastic nature of wind, the out-

These two parameters are not functions of time since, in the

There are several ways of testing these two hypotheses. For the hypothesis, tests on the mean of a distribution (such as the Student t-test) may be used, and for the second, a test on the normality of distribution (such as the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test) might be appropriate. Here, however, rather than using statistical absence of abnormal behaviour,

As mentioned

tests to detect a change in Dxi,j(t) at any time, we will rely upon before and illustrated on Fig. 4 for the case of tower vibration, this distribution is normal. and, as mentioned above, this bias is constant in time. The standard devi- ation is a random noise caused by the ergodicity of the signal.
The detection of a change in behaviour of the physical quantity j of a WTG i in fact detects a change in distribution f(mi,j,si,j). In terms

control charts: these are more appropriate for continuous moni- toring of a quantity. The control chart methodology will be described in the following section.
Lebranchu et al. have presented in Ref. [8] a method for the monitoring of a main bearing using the temperature difference between it and the remaining bearings on its wind farm. Here we will present its application to a wider range of components of a WTG: we will also discuss this method's limitations.

Fig. 3. Illustration of the calculation of the difference between measurement of a single WTG and average of all other WTGs on the wind farm.
Fig. 4. Example of the distribution of the Dxi,j(t). Here the case of the Difference in tower vibration between a WTG and the wind farm's remaining WTGs.


4.1. Control charts

In order to decide whether or not the WTGs have sustained changes in their behaviour, an Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA) control chart was used. Control charts are used in Statistical Process Control (SPC). A time series of the data or a sta- tistic of a sample of this data (such as the mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum) is plotted together with control limits [25]. Control limits are de?ned by the process's history or requirements, to 0.7 provided satisfactory results. However, l 0.3 seems to be the optimal value, and therefore, all our analyses were made using this value.
 The lower and upper control limits, LCL and UCL, were calculated based on the standard deviation of the process within a reference period. Here the reference period used was the ?rst year of avail- able data,  covering  any  seasonal  variations.  These  were  are expressed as follow expressions: and whenever the data steps outside of these limits, the process is viewed as out of control and thus, statistically different from its reference. There are a few rules that can be used to determine if the process is out of control or not.


In the present case, prior to using the control chart,



e main objective of this step was to reduce noise in the data. Here, data was taken at ten minute intervals, and the objective was to detect events building up on a daily to monthly time-scale. The use of a moving average as a high-frequency ?lter helped reduce the noise and improved detection performance. The period of the moving average depended on the quantity monitored and the time-scale over which problems could occur.
After the moving average was taken, the EWMA control chart was applied [26]. The expression for the EWMA Zi,j(t), for Dxi,j(t) was expressed as follows:
with Zi,j(0) is the target value for the process or its historical mean. The EWMA acted as a high-frequency ?lter with l as a smoothing value. l is from 0 to 1 and the smaller the l, the higher the smoothing. Depending on the level of variation in the variable of interest, the optimal lambda changes. For a large, sudden change, l must be relatively high, near 0.6e0.8 and for a small, progressive variation, l the optimal l falls somewhere between 0.2 and 0.4 [27]. Various values for this parameter have been studied and values up
with s, being the variance of the quantity monitored over a refer- ence period where the process has not experienced any abnormal issue. Usually, k 3 correspond to a three sigma or 99.9% con?- dence level. The EWMA control must be applied on data that is normally distributed. This requirement was satis?ed for each application presented.

5. Results

To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed methodology, four study cases are presented here. In each of these cases, a change in behaviour of a WTG was observed and the use of a monitoring method could have reduced production losses caused by under- performances or prolonged downtime. The produced electrical energy is not directly impacted but nonetheless present. The study cases are from four different WTGs, each on a different wind farm.

5.1. Electrical energy produced

In this case, the monitored quantity is the electrical energy produced by a WTG. This kind of monitoring could re?ect problems such as underperformances or blade erosion. For each ten minute intervals where the WTG was available, the difference in produc- tion between it and the remaining available WTGs on the wind farm was calculated. This difference was then averaged on a monthly basis. Fig. 5 illustrates the application of a EWMA control chart to the difference in electrical energy production between one WTG and the rest of the ?eet.
 Following the application of the proposed methodology, it was found that between April 2012 and October 2012, on this WTG, a curtailment algorithm was mistakenly activated following major maintenance. If the proposed methodology had been used, the control chart would have detected a change in behaviour almost immediately. Instead, this step-type shift caused production losses of approximately 800 MWh per day over the whole period.

5.2. Tower vibration

Tower vibration can provide useful information on the health of the structure or highlight rotor or yaw problems. The tower vi- bration is measured directly under the drivetrain. In this applica- tion, the difference between this WTG and the ?eet average vibration level was calculated for each ten minute average while the WTG is available. Fig. 6 illustrates a case of a sudden change in vibration level: following the replacement of one of the blades on this WTG, the vibration level suddenly increased. This was caused by a mechanical imbalance of the rotor. A couple of weeks after the change, the rotor was rebalanced, and vibrations returned to their prior level. Rotor imbalance is a serious issue that can damage the drive-train's components if not treated rapidly.
For another WTG, a progressive increase in vibrations following preventive maintenance has been investigated (Fig. 7). During the maintenance of this turbine, the yaw system was over-torqued, causing excessive vibrations each time the WTG changed its orientation.
Analyzing the tower vibration can provide useful indications of damage the WTGs sustained in terms of fatigue analysis. This can

help plan preventive maintenance on wind farms and, over the long term perspective, prolong the lifetimes of WTGs.

5.3. Yaw

 Even though a WTG is designed to face the wind at all times, in some cases, like in imposed directional curtailment, yaw or nacelle azimuth is an important value to monitor. While it is assumed that the WTG is always facing the wind correctly, the value measured is not always accurate. In some cases, for two neighbouring WTGs, the SCADA will measure and archive major differences in yaw values. In the present case, since there is a discontinuity in the yaw (passing from 360¡ð to 0¡ð), the average and the difference must be calculated vectorially. Fig. 8 illustrates this issue, where the layout of one section of a wind farm at a certain time is shown. The position of each wind turbine is shown by a dot. Line color and length is an indicator of the turbine production level (blue is the lower and red is the higher), and line direction represents nacelle azimuth, or yaw, as provided by the SCADA system. As seen in Fig. 8, one of the WTGs appears to be drifting in a direction opposite to its neighbours. This situation is caused by an error in the measurement of the yaw itself: this value is measured using a proximity switch which counts the
number of metal teeth. If the teeth are worn, or if the grease con- tains metal particles, the tooth count can be erroneous, resulting in an apparent drift in yaw. Fig. 9 presents the case of an apparent drift of a WTG's nacelle. Since 2009, the difference between the yaw of this particular WTG and the mean yaw of the wind farm's remaining WTGs has been constantly increasing.
In general, this will not be an issue, because even in cases where measured yaw is incorrect, the WTG is, in reality, still facing the wind. However, when directional curtailment is applied to a WTG, if this curtailment is intended for a certain wind direction, yaw measurement must be reliable. The WTG's performance will be reduced in the wrong direction and the WTG will be unprotected in the proper direction.
As mentioned above, since the yaw is an angle, one must be careful with the mathematical operations. Here, sums and

Fig. 5. Case study of the application of a control chart to the difference between the production of a single WTG and the mean production of the remaining WTGs on the wind farm. This example shows the detection of a badly activated curtailment.

Fig. 6. Case study of the application of a control chart comparing a WTG's tower vibration of a WTG a with the mean vibration of the wind farm's remaining WTGs. This example shows detection of a rotor imbalance.
Fig. 7. Case study of the application of a control chart showing one WTG's the tower vibration as compared to the mean vibration of the wind farm remaining WTGs. This example shows the detection of a progressively rising tower vibration. subtractions must be done vectorially. Since yaw is an input parameter for a WTG, model monitoring cannot be used here and thus, proposed methodology of particular interest for monitoring yaw.

5.4. Gearbox temperature

It has been demonstrated that some failures in gearboxes or bearings can be detected using temperature analysis [8]. In these

cases, friction becomes greater and thus transfers energy by heat. Therefore, monitoring the temperature of gearboxes and bearings can possibly warn the operator of upcoming failures.
 Here, two different case studies will be presented on the application of the differences in gearbox temperature between a single WTG and the average of the wind farm's remaining WTGs. The gearbox temperature of the studied WTG is controlled in order to maintain its temperature around 55 ¡ðC. However, if the gearbox is near failure, its cooling system capacity may prove to be

Fig. 8. Partial layout of a wind farm at a certain time. Line color indicates the wind speed and line direction indicates wind direction. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ?gure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Fig. 9. Case study of the application of a control chart to the yaw difference of WTG as compared to the mean yaw of wind farm's remaining WTGs. This example shows of slow drift.

insuf?cient. In February 2012, this gearbox failed and was replaced with a new one. In the weeks before the failure, the temperature had risen and the methodology proposed here would have raised an alarm in December 2011, two months before the failure occurred, as reported in Fig. 10. For wind farms in cold climates, as the ones studied here, it is important to avoid major repairs in wintertime.
A second issue occurred during winter 2015. Each winter, since, December 2013, the temperature of the gearbox oil of another WTG was found to be lower than the average temperature of the remaining WTGs on the wind farm, as reported by the control chart in Fig. 11. It was found that the oil temperature control system of the gearbox was faulty. Although, this situation is not as important as a gearbox failure, if the gearbox is not suf?ciently cooled or is overcooled, it will suffer damage. In winters of cold climates such as in Canada, the oil must be heated. If control over



6.1. Required wind farm size

 To use the mean of the wind farm as a reference, a certain minimum number of WTGs in the wind farm is required. The mean of the wind farm must be consistent. In the case of a wind farm that has too few WTGs if an important shift occurs on one of them, the average over the wind farm will be affected signi?cantly by that shift. Thus, the statistical inertia of the mean of a population (all WTGs of the wind farm) in this speci?c case must be evaluated.
 The effect on an important shift in the behaviour of one WTG on the average of a quantity is expressed by the following: overcooled gearbox.
 The temperature control of the gearbox makes the use of physical model-based monitoring dif?cult. A model that can pre- dict the temperature of the gearbox must take into account all parameters that could affect oil temperature. However, the power
   
Let's add a shift of dxi to one of the xi. We de?ne ¦Åx as the maximum acceptable impact on the average. Thus, we can re-write eq. (11) in this inequality:

of the cooling or heating system is not measured. Thus, it is now possible with the proposed methodology to provide a model that will adequately monitor a gearbox, based on available measurements.

which can simplify to:

Fig. 10.   Case study of the application of a control chart to the difference between one WTG's gearbox temperature and the mean temperature of the wind farm's remaining WTGs.   This example shows early detection of a gearbox failure.

Fig. 11. Case study of the application of a control chart to the gearbox temperature difference of one WTG as compared with the mean temperature of  the wind farm's  remaining WTGs. This example shows oil temperature control failure.

(13)
   
We choose to accept a maximum shift in the average of 1% of x, which sets ¦Å to 0.01. As for the maximum shift size to be observed that has no in?uence on the average, we choose 25% of x. This lead

In the present case, since all WTGs are in the same operating conditions and thus, each xi are similar, we can af?rm that x and xi are in the same order (x xi ). Thus, the precedent inequality becomes: to minimal wind farm size of around 25 WTGs. This limit is a guideline and the values for ¦Å and d could be different. However, ¦Å should be small, since the aim of this calculation is to limit the variation of x. As for d, smaller values would conclude to smaller wind farm size. However, a greater d would not be appropriate since we have made the assumption that x is similar to xi.
Here, the wind farms studied have each more than 50 WTGs.

Fig. 12. Centralized control chart for a WTG.

Thus, the proposed methodology can be used for all of them.

6.2. Centralized and normalized control chart

Since this methodology is optimal for use in large wind farms, and because several physical quantities are measured on each WTG, the number of control charts or ?gures needed for analysis can be great. One way to reduce the number of control charts is to group  all  the  physical  quantities  of  a  single  WTG  onto  a singlegure. In order to do this, Dxi,j(t) must be nondimensional. This means  reshaping  distribution  to  distribution  f(0,1). average of the remaining WTGs on its wind farm. Following this comparison, control charts are used in order to determine whether or not the WTG is behaving abnormally. Various cases based on the data available have been presented in order to illustrate the effec- tiveness of this monitoring approach.
 In comparison with model-based monitoring, the use of the wind farm as a reference is a simpler method that can be used by O&M engineers. While model-based monitoring can provide better results, it uses complex algorithm such as arti?cial neural networks, random forests, principal components analyses or other data- mining methods. The method we are presenting here is suitablefor industrial applications as it is simple and robust. It could easily be implemented online to continuously monitor WTGs. Moreover, it can be used for a wide range of turbine aspects and components. However, the proposed method can only be used on large wind farms (minimum size of around 25 WTGs) and if an issue is affecting all the WTGs in a wind farms, this method will not be able to generate an alarm.

One important aspect of a monitoring method is the manage- ment of alarms. A good method must maximize the detection rate and speed of changes in the behaviour of a WTG while minimizing the rate of false alarms. This kind of robustness required can be
are the average and the standard deviation of

provided by Control Charts such as the EWMA control chart.

Fig. 12 shows the centralized control chart for a WTG, with applications described in Section 5 (nacelle yaw; tower vibration; and gearbox temperature). For the case of this control chart, the control limits are set to 3 and 3, corresponding to three standard deviation limits. For the case of this particular WTG, the control charts detect a change in yaw in autumn 2010, while the behaviour of the other physical quantities remains in control.


