

 Effect of Pitch Difference between the Bolt-Nut Connections upon the  

               Anti-Loosening Performance and Fatigue Life  


                                              
Abstract                               

  In this paper, the effect of a slight pitch difference between a bolt and nut is studied. Firstly,  

by varying the pitch difference, the prevailing torque required for the nut rotation, before the nut  

                                          
touches  the  clamped  body,  is  measured  experimentally.  Secondly,  the  tightening  torque  is  

determined as a function of the axial force of the bolt after the nut touches the clamped body.  

The results show that a large value of pitch difference may provide large prevailing torque that  


causes an anti-loosening effect although a very large pitch difference  may deteriorate the bolt  


axial force under a certain tightening torque. Thirdly, a suitable pitch difference  is  determined  

taking into account the anti-loosening and clamping abilities. Fourthly, fatigue experiments  are  

conducted  using  three  different  values  of  pitch  difference  for  various  stress  amplitudes.  It  is  
found  that  the  fatigue  life  could  be  extended  when  a  suitable  pitch  difference  is  considered  

Furthermore, the chamfered corners at nut ends  are considered,  and it is  found that  the finite  

element  analysis  with  considering  the  chamfered  nut  threads  has  a  good  agreement  with  the  

experimental  observation.  Finally,  the  most  desirable  pitch  difference  required  for  improving  

both anti-loosening and fatigue life is proposed.    

  
1 Introduction  

  The  bolt-nut  connections  are  important  joining  elements  and  are  widely  used  to  

connect  and  disconnect  members  conveniently  at  a  low  cost.  Reference  [1]  fully  

  
reviewed  the  history  as  well  as  the  evolution  of  the  screw  fasteners.  To  ensure  that  
structures are safety joined, good anti-loosening performance and high fatigue strength  
are  required.  Most  previous  studies  have  been  mainly  focusing  on  anti-loosening  

performance  [2-7],  and  few  studies  have  contributed  to  improvements  in  the  fatigue  
strength [8-17]. This is because a high stress concentration factor, e.g. K =3-5, appears  

at the No.1 bolt thread and it is not easy to reduce it. Moreover, usually for special bolt- 

nut  connections  the  anti-loosening  ability  affects  the  fatigue  strength  and  the  cost  


significantly.   In   other   words,   anti-loosening   bolt-nut   connections   have   not   been  
     
                                   
developed until now without a reduction in fatigue strength and a raising in the cost.    


  This paper, therefore, focuses on the effect of pitch difference in a connection on the  

anti-loosing performance and fatigue life. As shown in Fig. 1, if the nut pitch is larger  

than the bolt pitch, the thread No. 1 at the left-hand side is in contact before the loading  

and becomes in no-contact  status after the loading as shown in Fig. 1  (a). However, if  


the nut pitch is smaller than the bolt pitch, the thread No.1 at the  right-hand  side is in  
contact before the loading and remains in contact after loading,  also  the contact force  

becomes  larger  after  the  loading  as  shown  in  Fig.  1  (b).  Therefore,  the  largest  stress  

concentration at thread No.1 can be reduced only by a larger nut pitch.    

  The concept of differential pitch was first suggested by Stromeyer [ 18] in 1918. He  

suggested that the load distribution in a threaded connection thread could be  optimized  

by  varying  the  relative  pitches.  Then,  the  theoretical  load  distribution  in  bolt-nut  has  

been  developed  by  Sopwith  [19],  who  also  used  his  formula  to  discuss  the  load  

distribution improvement along the bolt threads by varing pitch. He found that a smaller  


pitch in the bolt than in the nut would improve the load distribution. Sparling [20] found  

that the fatigue strength of the bolt can be improved by increasing the clearance between  

the  first  few  engaged  threads  at  the  load  bearing  face  of  the  nut  by  tapering  the  nut  

thread,   which   produces   an   effective   difference   in   pitch.   This   modification   was  


investigated  by  Kenny  and  Patterson  [2 1,  22]  by  applying  the  frozen  stress  three- 
dimensional photoelasticity. Maruyama [23] analyzed the influence of pitch error and  

the  loaded  flank  angle  error  of  the  bolt  thread  upon  the  stress  at  the  root  of  the  bolt  
thread   by   copper-electroplating   method   with   the   finite   element   method.   It   was  

considered that the pitch adjustment has a larger effect than the flank angle adjustment  
for improving the fatigue strength of the bolt thread.  
  However,  the  previous  studies  on  pitch  difference  were  limited  to  fatigue  strength  
                                  
improvement, and the effect of pitch difference on the anti-loosening performance has  

not been investigated  yet. There is no systematic experimental data are available, e.g.   
the S-N curves for specimens of different pitch differences have not been obtained.  

  Table 1 shows a comparison of some special bolt-nut connections. Most of the special  

bolt-nuts have either more  components  or very special geometry, leading to a complex  

manufacture process and a high cost which is usually more than 3 times of the normal  

bolt-nut.  The suggested nut in this study can be manufactured as the same way as the  


normal nut, and the cost is predicted to be about 1.5 times of the normal nut considering  

the modification of thread tap as well as the checking procedure on the pitch difference.  

  Our  previous  experimental  work  clarified  that  the  fatigue  life  is  improved  by  

introducing a suitable pitch difference under a certain level of stress amplitude [24, 25].  

In this study,  at first,  the effect of pitch difference on the anti-loosening performance  

will be studied experimentally, and the most desirable pitch difference will be proposed  

taking into account the effect on clamping ability. Furthermore, the fatigue experiments  
will be carried out to investigate the effect of pitch difference on the improvement of  

fatigue life. The finite element analysis will also be applied to discuss the stress status at  

bolt  thread.  Taking  the  anti-loosening  performance  and  the  fatigue  life  improvement  

into account, the most desirable pitch difference will be proposed.  
2 Effect of the Pitch Difference on the Nut Rotation    

2.1 Bolt-Nut Specimens                            

  Japanese Industrial Standard (JIS) M16 bolt-nut connections were employed to study  

the  effect  of  a  slight  pitch  difference.  Figure  2  shows  the  dimensions  of  bolt-nut  
specimen  used  in  this  study.  Figure  3  shows  a  schematic  illustration  of  bolt-nut  

connection  having  pitch  differences.  Usually,  standard  M16  bolts  and  nuts  have  the  
 
                                        
same pitch of 2  mm, but herein the nut pitch is slightly larger than the bolt pitch.  The  

clearance  between  the  bolt-nut  threads  is  equal  to  125  μm.  The  bolt  material  was  

chromium-molybdenum steel SCM435 (JIS), and the nut material was medium carbon  

steel S45C (JIS) quenched and tempered, whose properties are indicated in Table 2, and  
whose stress-strain curves are shown in Fig. 4, respectively.    

  Figure  3  (a)  also  shows  a  contact  status  between  bolt  and  nut  threads  during  the  


tightening  process.  As  the  nut  is  screwed  onto  the  bolt,  the  pitch  difference  is  

accumulated.  Finally,  the  first  and  sixth  nut  threads  become  in  contact  with  the  bolt  

threads as shown in Fig.  3  (a). The distance,  δ , where the contact takes place, can be  

obtained geometrically using Equations (1) and (2).          

  

and C  are the horizontal and vertical clearances between bolt and nut as shown in Fig. 3  

(b). The specimens in this study had five different levels of pitch difference  α, namely  

α=0  (for  standard  connection),  αsmall ,  αmiddle,  αlarge  and  αverylarge,  Herein,  it  should  be  

noted that the nut has 8 threads and therefore Equation (1) is valid when  n  is less than  


8. Table 3  shows the distance, δ , and nut thread number  in contact, n , obtained from  
Equations (1) and (2). The distance,  δ , can be predicted for α , α   and  α    ,  
although no thread contact may be expected for α  , because n  is larger than the total  

number of threads number 8 for the nut.        

2.2 Prevailing Torque                   
                                     
  After the nut threads become in contact over distance δ  as shown in Fig. 3 (a), the so- 

                                       
called  prevailing  torque  is  required  for  the  nut  rotation  even  though  the  nut  does  not  


touch  the  clamped  body  yet.  Table  3  also  lists  the  prevailing  torque  T   measured  by  

using an electric torque wrench.    
  For  α=α    ,  the  value  of  n   is  larger  than  8,  and  therefore  all  threads  are  in  non- 

contact  status  and  the  prevailing  torque  was  zero  experimentally.  For  α=αmiddle,  since  


value  n   is smaller than 8, the threads are in contact and prevailing torque was  T =25  


N∙m.  For  α=α   ,  prevailing  torque  was  T =50  N∙m,  and  for  α=α   the  threads  
deformed  largely  and  the  nut  was  locked  before  touching  the  clamped  body  since  it  

cannot be rotated anymore.  

2.3 Prevailing Torque vs Clamping Force    

  Since the bolt and nut are used for connecting components or structures, the clamping  

ability to produce enough bolt-axial force is essential. Therefore, after the nut touches  

the clamped body, the relationship between the tightening torque and the clamping force  

was investigated. Note that tightening  torque  T  is different from prevailing torque  T ,  

  

which  is  defined  only  before  the  nut  touches  the  clamped  body.  To  obtain  the  

relationship between torque and clamping force,  the torque was controlled by using an  

electric torque wrench,  and the clamping force was measured by using the strain gauge  

attached to the clamped body surface as shown in Fig. 5 (a).  The uniaxial strain gauge  


with a length of 2 mm KFG-2 (Kyowa Electronic  Instruments Co.,  Ltd.)  was used in  
this   measurement.   Before   the   experiments,   calibration   tests   were   performed   by  

compressing  the  clamped  body  to  obtain  the  relationship  between  the  clamping  force  
and  surface strain as shown in Fig. 5 (a).  Similar tests  were performed  to calibrate  the  

torque wrench  as shown in Fig. 5 (b).  In order to compare anti-loosening performance  
for  different  pitch  differences,  the  same  tightening  torque  was  applied.  When  the  
tightening torque of 70 N·m was applied to the standard bolt-nut (α=0), the bolt-axial  

                                  
force  became  24  kN.  The  bolt  axial  force  24  kN  is  rather  smaller  compared  to  the  
normal bolt-axial force as the standard bolt-axial force 59.3 kN recommended in [26].  
However,  if  a  larger  bolt-axial  force  is  used,  the  effect  of  α  on  the  anti-loosening  
performance cannot be clearly demonstrated because the bolt-nut seizure occurs. In fact,  

when a torque of 150 N·m was applied in our preliminary experiments, bolt-nut seizure  
was  sometimes  observed  even  for  α ＝0  and  α ＝αsmall .  This  is  because  in  this  study,  


turning was used for manufacturing nuts, which leads to the bolt-nut seizure occurring  
more  easily  than  tapping,  which  is  usually  used  for  manufacturing  nuts.  The  tapping  

was not used in this study because of the high cost. However, in the further research, the  

tapping  nut  can  be  used  to  prevent  the  bolt-nut  seizure.  In  this  study,  therefore,  the  

smaller  tightening  torque  of  70  N·m  is  used  to  compare  the  anti-loosening  ability  

conveniently.  

  Figure 6 shows the tightening torque vs. clamping force as experimentally obtained.  

When  α=αsmall , the torque-clamping force relationship was same  with  the one of  α=0. 
  

When α=αmiddle, the prevailing torque of 25 N∙m was required before the nut touches the  

clamped  plate.  Under  the  same  tightening  torque  of  70  N∙m,  the  clamping  force  was  

reduced to 20 kN. When  α=αlarge, under a torque of 70 N∙m the axial force decreased  

significantly to 8 kN, which was only 1/3 of the axial force of α=0.  
3 Loosening Experiment                           
3.1 Device                                 

  Based  on  the  torque-axial  force  relationship  obtained  above,  the  loosening  

experiments  were  performed  to  investigate  the  effect  of  pitch  difference  on  the  anti- 

loosening  performance.  For  each  pitch  difference  α,  two  specimens  were  tested.  As  


shown in Fig. 7, the experimental device was an impact-vibration testing machine based  

                                  
on NAS3350 (National Aerospace Standard), whose vibration frequency was  about 30  
Hz, and vibration acceleration is 20 g. The maximum vibration cycle of NAS3350 is 30  

000,  therefore,  if  the  number  of  vibration  cycles  was  over  30  000,  the  anti-loosening  
performance  may  be  considered  to  be  good  enough.  A  counter  connected  with  the  
experimental device shows the number of cycles of vibrations. As states in Section 2.3,  
the   bolt-axial   force   24   kN   was   considered   for   the   standard   bolt-nut,   and   the  
corresponding  tightening  torque  was  70  N∙m.  In  order  to  compare  the  anti-loosening  

performance under the same condition, in this paper, the nuts were tightened to the same  

torque of 70 N∙m for all the specimens.  

3.2 Results    

  Table 4 lists the number of cycles for the start loosening and the nut dropping. Table  

4  also  lists  the  prevailing  torque  measured  in  the  loosening  experiments  and  the  bolt  

axial forces estimated from Fig. 6. For α=0 and α=αsmall , the nuts dropped at about 1,000  

cycles. For  α=αmiddle,  the nuts did not drop until 30  000 cycles, but the loosening was  

observed for one specimen. For α=αlarge, no loosening was observed until 30 000 cycles  

although the axial force was estimated to be only 8 kN. It may be concluded that if α is  

too  small,  the  anti-loosening  cannot  be  expected  and  if  α  is  too  large,  the  clamping  

ability  is  not  good  enough.  By  considering  both  the  anti-loosening  and  clamping  
abilities,  α=αmiddle  can  be  selected  as  the  most  suitable  pitch  difference.  It  should  be  

noted that the most desirable pitch difference of α=αmiddle was obtained with a clearance  

of C =125 μm.                             
4 Finite Element Analysis           

  The previous discussion shows that  α=αlarge  has a good  anti-loosening performance  
                                   
but  insufficient  clamping  ability.  This  is  due  to  the  large  deformation  of  the  threads  

during the tightening process. To confirm this, an axisymmetric model of the bolt-nut  

connection  was  constructed  by  using  the  FEM  code  MSC.Marc/Mentat  2012.  The  

material of the bolt was SCM435 and the material of the nut was S45C to match the  

experimental conditions. These stress-strain curves are indicated in Fig. 4. Herein, bolt,  

nut and clamped body are modeled as three bodies in contact. In the tightening process,  

the  accumulated  pitch  difference  causes  the  axial  force  between  the  bolt  threads  

engaged with the nut thread. In this modelling, the bolt head is fixed in the horizontal  

direction,  and  the  tightening  process  is  expressed  by  shifting  the  nut  threads  position  

discontinuously, one by one, at the pitch interval. As the nut is moving towards the bolt  

head, the accumulation of the pitch difference leads to a slight overlap between the bolt  

threads and the nut threads. The direct constraints method is invoked in the detection of  

contact in MSC. Marc  [27], then, the nut is compressed while the bolt is stretched in the  

simulation. In this way, the axial force between the bolt threads can be investigated step  

by  step  as  the  nut  is  shifted  onto  the  bolt.  It  should  be  noted  that  this  axisymmetric  


simulation may include some numerical errors but the real axial force between the bolt  

threads  is  difficult  to  be  measured  experimentally  because  the  nut  is  engaged  at  this  

position.  The  multifrontal  sparse  solver  was  used.  The  isotropic  hardening  law  was  

assumed  with  von  Mises  yield  criterion.  Friction  coefficient  of  0.3  was  assumed  and  

Coulomb  friction  was  used.  In  the  next  sub-section,  the  results  for  α=αmiddle  and  
α=αverylarge will be compared.                  

4.1 Bolt Axial Force                       

  Since  the  nut  pitch  is  larger  than  the  bolt  pitch,  a  bolt  axial  force,  F  ,  in  tension  
appears between the bolt  threads. F   corresponds to prevailing torque  T . It should be  

noted that Fα is different from the bolt axial force  (clamping force) obtained  in Fig.  6.  
                                     
Here,  the  axial  force  Fα  between  bolt  threads  arising  from  the  accumulation  of  pitch  


difference in the tightening process. Figure 8 (a) indicates F   for α=α  before the nut  

touches  the  clamped  body  from  Position  A  to  Position  G.  Position  A  is  where  the  

prevailing  torque  appears,  and  Position  B  is  where  the  nut  thread  shifted  at  the  pitch  
interval from Position A and so on. Finally, Position G is where the nut starts contacting  
the clamped body.  From Position A to Positions B, C, the  whole nut is  being shifted  
onto the bolt, and therefore the accumulated pitch difference affects the results. From  
Position  C  to  Positions  D,  E,  F,  G,  the  pitch  difference  is  not  accumulated  since  the  

whole nut is already in contact with the bolt.    

where the prevailing torque appears, and Position H is where the nut starts contacting  

the clamped body. In contrast to the case of α=αmiddle, as the nut is being shifted onto the  

bolt, the bolt axial forces corresponding to nut threads No.1 and No.8 become smaller  

than that in the middle part. This result is due to nut threads No.2 and No.7, which are  
also in contact as well as threads No.1 and No.8. Under α=αmiddle only nut threads No.1  

and No.8 are in contact with bolt threads.  

4.2 Plastic Deformation  

  Figure 9 (a)  shows the equivalent plastic strain of threads for α=αmiddle  at Position G.  
Similarly,  Fig.  9  (b)  shows  the  equivalent  plastic  strain  of  threads  for  α=αverylarge  at  
Position H. It may be concluded that too large pitch difference α=αverylarge may cause the  
large  deformation  at  nut  threads  resulting  in  deterioration  of  bolt  clamping  ability.  A  

suitable pitch difference may cause the reasonable deformation and may not reduce the  

clamping force.           

5 Effect of the Pitch Difference on the Fatigue Strength  
5.1 Results and Discussion    D  
  Our previous experiments clarified that the fatigue life was improved by introducing  
a pitch difference  α=αsmall under a certain level of stress amplitude [24-25]. According  
to the loosening experiments, it was found that  α=αmiddle  was the most desirable pitch  
difference to realize the anti-loosening performance. To improve the fatigue life as well  
as the anti-loosening performance, fatigue experiments were conducted  systematically  

for three types of specimens, i.e. α=0, α=αsmall and α=αmiddle with various levels of stress  

amplitude.  

  The 392 kN Servo Fatigue Testing Machine with a frequency of 8 Hz was used in this  

study. The pulsating tension fatigue experiments with a stress ratio of R=0.14-0.56 were  

conducted under a fixed average stress of σ  = 213  MPa. Figure 10  shows the obtained  

S-N curves. Independent of α, it was found that the fatigue limit at N=2×10  cycles was  

60 MPa.    


  

  The  fractured  specimens  were  first  investigated.  As  an  example,  Fig.  1 1  shows  

longitudinal sections for  α=0,  α=α and  α=α , when the stress amplitude σ =100  

MPa. For α=0, the initial crack may occur at thread No.2, and final fracture happened at  

thread No.1. For  α=αsmall  and α=αmiddle, long cracks were observed at threads No.5 and  


No.6, and therefore initial crack may occur at threads No.5 or No.6 extending towards  

thread  No.1.  Moreover,  when  the  stress  amplitude  was  σ =60  MPa,  the  fractured  

specimens of α=αsmall  and α=αmiddle  also showed more than 1 mm long cracks initiating  
from the thread surface  although no long crack  was observed  for  α=0.  Therefore, the  
actual  fatigue  limit  of  the  bolt  specimen  may  be  lower  than  60  MPa  for  α=αsmall  and  

α=αmiddle .                        

  Figure  12  shows  the  crack  initiation  and  extension  mechanism  for  α=αsmall  and  

α=αmiddle .  As  shown  in  Fig.12  (a),  crack  initiated  at  thread  No.6.  After  the  crack  
extended at No.6, the distributed load F  became smaller and F became larger as shown  

in Fig. 12 (b),        . Then, a new crack initiated at thread No.5 as show in Fig.12 (c).  

By extending new cracks from No.6 toward No.1, the finial fracture happened nearby  
No.1.  In this way,  since many cracks initiated and propagated one by one,  the fatigue  


life of α=αsmall and α=αmiddle can be extended compared with the one of α=0.  

  The experimental observation in Fig.11 shows that the crack initiated around the root  

of bolt thread ψ=-60 ～60 , instead of the nut thread contact region. Therefore, in this  

study, the contact fatigue concept was not considered.  

  When the stress amplitude was larger than 80 MPa,  as shown in Fig. 10, the fatigue  

life for  α=αsmall  was about 1.5 times larger than that of  α=0. Also, the fatigue life for  

α=αmiddle was about 1.2 times larger than that of  α=0. The results showed that the most  

desirable pitch difference  α=αsmall  for fatigue performance was different from the most  

desirable pitch difference of α=αmiddle for anti-loosening performance.  

  In Fig.10, there are different fatigue data between α=αsmall and α=0 because the stress  

status at bolt thread changed when α=αsmall was introduced. On the other hand, as shown  

in  Fig.6,  since  there  was  no  prevailing  torque  appears  in  the  tightening  process  for  

α=αsmall , it has the  same torque-axial force relationship with the normal specimen  α=0.  

The effect of pitch difference on the fatigue life is different from the effect on tightening  
process.  This  is  because  that  the  fatigue  damage  is  mainly  controlled  by  the  stress  

amplitude produced by the axial loading at the bolt threads.  
5.2 Strength Analysis                 
  To  clarify  the  effect  of  the  pitch  difference  on  the  stress  at  the  bolt  threads,  the  

elastic-plastic FE analyses were performed for  α=0 and  α=αsmall under load F=30±14.1  
kN. The  axisymmetric finite element model of bolt-nut connection is  shown in Fig. 13.  
A  cylindrical  clamped  plate  was  modeled  with  an  inner  diameter  of  17.5  mm,  outer  
diameter of 50 mm and thickness of 35 mm. The material of the bolt and clamped body  

was  SCM435  and  the  material  of  the  nut  was  S45C  to  match  the  experimental  

conditions. These stress-strain curves are indicated in Fig. 4. The bolt, nut and clamped  

body were modeled as three contact bodies. A fine mesh was  created at the root of bolt  
thread  with  the  size  of  0.015mm ×0.01mm,  and  4-noded,  axisymmetric  solid,  full  


integration element was used. The isotropic hardening law was assumed with von Mises  

yield  criterion.  Friction  coefficient  of  0.3  with  Coulomb  friction  was  used  for  the  

analysis.  The  clamped  body  was  fixed  in  the  horizontal  direction,  and  cyclic  load  

F=30±14.1 kN was applied on the bolt head as shown in Fig.  13. Then, the stress status  

under  the  maximum  load  F=30+ 14.1  kN  and  the  minimum  load  F=30-14.1  kN  was  

considered to obtain the endurance limit diagrams. Figure 14 defines the angle  ψ  at the  

bolt thread. In the FE analysis σψmax was the stress σψ at each thread under the maximum  

  

load,  and  σ   was  the  stress  σ    at  each  thread  under  the  minimum  load.  The  stress  


amplitude and mean  stress were  investigated at the same angle  ψ where the maximum  

stress amplitude appears,  since the stress amplitude is the most important parameter for  

fatigue analysis. The mean stress σ   and stress amplitude σ at each thread are defined as  

follows:                                            


Fig.  15  and  compared  with  Soderberg  line  representing  the  endurance  limit  for  plain  

specimen.  Figure  15  indicates  that  the  stress  amplitude  at  thread  No.1  for  α=αsmall  is  

much smaller than that of  α=0 although the stress amplitudes of threads No.4 to No.8  

are much larger than those of  α=0. Therefore, the cracks may appear faster at No.4 to  

No.8  for  α=αsmall ,  but  the  fatigue  life  time  is  extended  as  shown  in  Fig.  10  since  the  

crack propagation from threads No.8 to No.1 needs longer time.    
6 Effect of incomplete nut thread  

  In the above discussion, the complete thread model of 8-thread-nuts were  considered  
by FE analyses, but usually as shown in Fig. 16 (a) both ends of nuts have chamfered  

corners,  which  are  required  to  make  bolt  inserted  smoothly.  This  types  of  nuts  were  

used in the fatigue experiments. Therefore, the chamfered corner was modeled  first by  

an incomplete thread model A as shown in Fig. 16 (b). Figure 17  shows FE mesh for  

model A and  the  endurance limit diagram, when  α=α   and  σ =  100 MPa. From Fig.  
                                              small   a 

17 (b), it can be seen that the stress in thread No.8 decreases and the stress in thread  

No.6 increases. However, the stress in thread No.6 is not the most dangerous because  

thread No.8 is still in contact with a nut thread.    


  Therefore,  thread  model  B  as  shown  in  Fig.   16  (c)  is  considered,  where  the  

incomplete nut thread does not contact bolt thread anymore due to the chamfered nut- 

ends.  Figure  18  (a)  shows  the  FE  mesh  for  model  B.  Figure  18  (b)  (c)  show  the  

maximum and minimum stresses in each thread when the maximum and minimum load  

F=30±14.1 kN are applied. When α=0, the maximum stress amplitude appears at thread  
No.2. Therefore, the analytical result coincides with the experimental result in Fig. 1 1  


(a).  When  α=αsmall ,  the  maximum  stress  amplitude  appears  at  thread  No.6,  which  is  

close to the crack location in Fig. 1 1 (b).        

  Figure   18  (d)  (e)  show  the  endurance  limit  diagrams  for  α=0  and  α=αsmall .  By  
changing  8-thread-model  to  6-thread-model  B,  the  most  dangerous  thread  for  α=0  is  
changed from thread No.1 to thread No.2. For  α=αsmall , thread No.6 becomes the most  
                                  
dangerous, corresponding to Fig. 1 1 (b). It is seen that the 6-thread-model B is useful to  
consider  the  chamfered  nut  threads  at  both  ends  in  order  to  explain  the  experimental  
results.            
  One may think that replicating the actual geometry of chamfered threads in Fig. 16  

(a)  should be used  in the  FE model. However, the chamfered angle is not always the  
same.  And  the  difference  between  the  results  for  model  B  and  the  chamfered  model  

with actual geometry  is not very large for  α ＝αsmall because threads No.1 and No.8 are  


not in contact. Only the largest difference appears at thread No. 1 for  α ＝0 because for  

model B there are no threads in contact  at No.1 thread.  In this study, therefore, simple  

incomplete  thread  model  B  has  been  used  because  our  main  target  is  to  analyze  the  

model having pitch difference  α. The results of the chamfered model for standard bolt- 

nut α ＝0 are indicated in appendix A.    
7 Suitable Pitch Difference    

  The  main  goal  of  this  study  is  to  find  out  a  suitable  pitch  difference  in  order  to  

improve  both  anti-loosening  effect  and  fatigue  life.  Figure  19  shows  a  schematic  

illustration of the fatigue life improvement and anti-loosening improvement by varying  

the pitch difference when the results of α=0 are regarded as the reference level. On one  

hand, to improve the fatigue life, the most desirable pitch difference may  be close to  

αsmall   as   shown   in   Fig.   10.   On   the   other   hand,   to   improve   the   anti-loosening  
performance, the most desirable pitch difference should be larger than  αmiddle  and close  

to αlarge  as shown in Table 4, although the nut locking phenomenon may happen if α is  


over αverylarge . Therefore, a suitable range for α can be indicated as shown in Fig. 19.  

  In  this  study,  the  bolt  material  SCM435  and  nut  material  S45C  are  assumed.  The  
                                  
stress-strain  curves  are  indicated  in  Fig.  4.  This  design  can  be  applied  to  bolt-nut  


connections made in other materials which have suitable elastic-plastic properties since  

the plastic deformation is required in order to realize the anti-loosening performance.  

8 Conclusions   

  In  this  study,  a  slight  pitch  difference  α  was  considered  for  the  M16  bolt-nut  


connections.  The  loosening  experiments  as  well  as  the  fatigue  experiments  were  

conducted  under  different  pitch  differences.  Finite  element  analysis  was  used  to  

investigate the stress and deformation at the bolt threads and the fatigue strength. The  

conclusions can be summarized as follows:  

(1) Considering both the anti-loosening performance and the clamping ability, α=αmiddle  

is found to be the most desirable pitch difference. This is because the nuts did not drop  

for α=αmiddle without losing clamping ability.  

(2)  The  anti-loosening  experiments  show  that  the  nuts  did  not  drop  for  α=αlarge,  but  

  

clamping  ability  is  deteriorated.  FEA  shows  that  for  α=αverylarge,  the  large  plastic  

deformation happens at threads of nut.    

(3) It is found that  α=αsmall  is the most desirable pitch difference to extend the fatigue  

life  of  the  bolt-nut  connection.  Compared  with  the  standard  bolt-nut  connection,  the  

fatigue life for α=αsmall can be extended to about 1.5 times.  

(4) The 6-thread-model  as shown in Fig. 18  is useful for analyzing 8-thread-nut model  


because nuts always have chamfered threads at both ends. Then, the results are  in good  
agreement with the experimental results.   

(5)  A  suitable  pitch  difference  to  improve  both anti-loosening  and  fatigue  life  can  be  
                                     
illustrated as shown in Fig. 19.   

  The  errors  and  uncertainties  associated  with  the  measurements  or  predictions  are  

                                    
always of concern in a study of this nature. In the loosening experiment, two specimens  

with the same pitch difference were tested together in  order to avoid the uncertainties.  

In the fatigue experiment in Fig. 10, the S-N  curves may have variations but they are  

distinct depending on the pitch difference. In the  axisymmetric FE modelling may have  

some errors but  previously one of the authors have compared the load distributions in  
bolt threads between the axisymmetric modelling and the three-dimensional modelling.  

Then, the relative errors between the two models are found to be less than 12% [28].  


    

Appendix A: The results for chamfered model  

    Figure A1 shows the chamfered model replicating the actual geometry in Fig. 16 (a).  

Figure A2 shows the results of the chamfered model in comparison with the results of  

the complete thread model in Fig. 13 when α=0. It is seen that because of no contact at  

thread  No.8 in the chamfered model,  mean  stress  σ    and stress amplitude  σ   increase  


except at thread No.1. Since the rigidity of nut thread No.1 decreases in the chamfered  

  

model, the stress at bolt thread No.1 does not change very much.  

Acknowledgments  

  The authors wish to express their thanks to the member of their group, Mr. Yu-Ichiro  

Akaishi and Mr. Yang Yu for their assistance in this study. The authors acknowledge  

the international collaboration grant funded by Commissie Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek  

(CWO),  Faculty  of  Engineering  and  Architecture,  Ghent  University.  The  research  for  
this  paper  was  financially  supported  by  the  Japanese  Ministry  of  Education  research  


expenses [grant number 23560164]; and Kitakyushu Foundation for the Advancement  

of Industry Science and Technology.  


