Reliability optimization of series-parallel systems with K-mixed redundancy strategy    This paper revisits the redundancy allocation problem, a well-known problem in reliability optimization, and implements a novel redundancy strategy, called K-mixed, to improve system reliability. The K-mixed strategy is a general form of a mixed strategy. The mixed strategy is a combination of active and standby redundancy strategies which was introduced in 2014. Initially, the mathematical formulation for calculating the reliability of the K-mixed strategy is investigated and then its power and efficiency are evaluated against different test problems and a famous benchmark problem. In order to solve the proposed benchmark problem, an efficient genetic algorithm is developed and the results are compared with those reported elsewhere. It is found that the proposed K-mixed strategy results in higher reliability in most situations than would otherwise be achieved by its mixed counterpart. It is concluded that by using the K-mixed strategy in an optimization model, system designers have the opportunity to select the best strategy for each subsystem from among all the different strategies available to design systems with maximum reliability.1. Introduction    High technology systems are mostly complex and expensive, but also need to be highly reliable because they are required to have important roles in modern industry. Reliability and mean time to failure (MTTF) are two fundamental measures of such systems. Reliability is de?ned as the probability that a system (or an entity) sufficiently performs its specific functions over a specific period of time under specific environmental conditions [1]. In order to improve the reliability of a specific system, one can use highly reliable components and/or a well- designed configuration to meet functional requirements and performance specifications. Finding the best configuration for a system by adding parallel components is called the redundancy allocation problem (RAP). RAP has been proved to belong to the NP-hard class of optimization problems [1]. In RAP, there are discrete component choices with known characteristics such as reliability, cost, and weight, where the objective is to find the optimal number of redundant components in each subsystem to maximize the overall system reliability subject to some constraints.    The redundancy strategy is used to determine how the redundant components are used in the system (or its subsystems). Traditionally, there are two redundancy strategies: active and standby. The active redundancy strategy is based on the assumption that all redundant components start operation simultaneously from time zero although only one is required for the whole system to operate. The standby strategy comes in three variants of cold, warm, and hot [2]. In the cold- standby strategy, the redundant components are protected from the operational stress associated with system operation so that no component fails before its activation. Components in the warm-standby strategy are somehow affected by the operational stresses. Finally, in the hot-standby strategy, component failure does not depend on whether the components are idle or in operation. The mathematical formulation for the hot-standby strategy is the same as that for the active one [3]. In all three variants of the standby strategy, redundant components are used sequentially based on a predetermined order at failure times of operating components by using a switching system. Recently, a new redundancy strategy, called mixed strategy, has been introduced which combines the active and standby strategies and is shown to outperform both [2]. In other words, the mixed strategy is the general form while the active and standby ones are its special forms.    Either of two scenarios may be envisioned for a switching system. In the first scenario (S1), the failure detection system/mechanism continually monitors system performance to detect a failure in which a redundant component is then activated. In addition to component failure, a switching system malfunction may occur at any time. In this scenario, switch reliability is a non-increasing function of time (老(t)). In the second scenario (S2), the switching system is used only at the occurrence of failure of a component. Failure of the switching system, therefore, happens only when it is used, and the probability of switch failure is considered as a constant value (老) [2?4].    Over the past decade, many optimization methods have been proposed for solving the RAP with active strategy [5?9], standby strategy [4,10?14], and a combination of active and standby strategies [9,15,16]. Underlying all these studies is the assumption that the redundancy strategy for a specific subsystem can only be one of the active or standby strategies. In most cases, the redundancy strategy is considered to be a predetermined decision while it is considered as a decision variable in some recent studies [3,14?16]. Recently, a new redundancy strategy, called the ※mixed redundancy strategy§, has been introduced [2]. It potentially uses both active and standby strategies in a subsystem simultaneously. Therefore, the number of active and standby components in each subsystem is a decision variable and must be determined by a mathematical model. Ardakan et al. [17] developed the mixed strategy for a bi-objective RAP problem and demonstrated its advantages over the active and standby counterparts. More specifically, results have shown that the mixed strategy leads to more than 10 structures with superior reliability to those obtained in all previous cases.    Feizabadi and Jahromi [18] developed the mixed strategy for a RAP problem with non-homogeneous components. Put more clearly, they considered the case in which standby components could be different from active ones but that all active and standby components had to be identical. In another study, they extended their model to a bi-objective RAP [19]. Recently, Gholinezhad and Hamadani [20] developed a mixed strategy for situations in which all the active and standby components were different. They developed a mathematical model for this non-homogeneous RAP problem and used a genetic algorithm (GA) to solve it. Ardakan et al. [21] investigated the capability of the mixed strategy applied to a reliability-redundancy allocation problem (RRAP) which is more complicated than the RAP. Results demonstrated that the mixed strategy led to a higher reliability in all the benchmark problems than did either active or standby strategies. The above mentioned studies con?rm the ability of the newly introduced mixed strategy to create highly reliable systems. In a recent study, Peiravi et al. [22] proposed a new redundancy strategy called K-mixed strategy which is a general form for the mixed strategy. Because of the complex nature of K-mixed strategy, they implemented the strategy only on one specific subsystem with 4 components.    In this paper, a famous series-parallel system with 14 subsystems is investigated when all four different redundancy strategies, i.e., active, standby, mixed and K-mixed can be used in any subsystem. For this purpose, a new mathematical model is developed where the redundancy strategy and the number of components in each subsystem are considered as the decision variables. The proposed mathematical model must select the best strategy with the best redundancy level to maximize the total system reliability. The results of implementing the K-mixed strategy to the benchmark problem are compared with those reported elsewhere to evaluate its applicability and efficiency. By solving this new mathematical model, the capabilities and advantages of the K-mixed strategy will be revealed, especially in comparison with the mixed one.    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the mixed and K-mixed redundancy strategies are described in detail. Also, the mathematical formulation for calculating the reliability of these strategies are investigated in this section. In Section 3, the modeling of the problem is presented and in Section 4, a GA is developed for solving the proposed model. A well-known benchmark problem is adopted and solved using the new strategy in Section 5 and different problems are created and the results are compared to demonstrate the superiority and advantages of the new K-mixed strategy over the previously developed active, standby, and mixed strategies. Conclusions are finally presented in the end of the paper.2. Mixed and K-mixed redundancy strategies2.1. Operating mechanism    In both mixed and K-mixed strategies, the numbers of active and standby components in each subsystem are considered as decision variables which must be optimally determined. This is a common feature of these strategies. The differences between the K-mixed strategy and the mixed one may be illustrated by considering a subsystem with four components. For this specific subsystem, all the different redundancy strategies (i.e., active, standby, mixed, and K-mixed) as outlined in Table 1 below are implemented.    In order to disclose the distinctive features of these two strategies, they are applied to the proposed subsystem with four components. As seen in Table 1, the proposed subsystem might have two different structures depending on whether the mixed or the K-mixed strategy is applied. These two structures are: I) Three components in the active mode and one in the standby; II) Two active and two standby components.    Fig. 1 illustrates these two different structures within the framework of a mixed strategy. Clearly, the subsystem starts its operation with 3 active components in structure I or with 2 in structure II. When the first active component fails, nothing happens for either structure and the subsystem continues working with the rest of its active components. When the second component fails in structure I, the subsystem continues operation with the last active component. In structure II, how- ever, the first standby component is activated by the switching system to replace the failed component because the second failing component is the last active one. From this point onwards, only one component is active in both structures and one standby component is replaced in a predetermined order upon the failure of this only component. This procedure continues as long as there is at least one standby component. When the last standby component is activated, the subsystem fails when this component also fails. It is worth noting that the standby components begin to operate in the mixed strategy when the last active component fails; this procedure (i.e., activating a redundant standby component to replace a failed active one) is the same as that in the standby strategy. Numerical results have shown that, for a switch re- liability equal to 0.99, the mixed strategy yields a higher system re- liability than those achieved under either the active or standby strategy [2,17,21].    Both the mixed and standby strategies require a switching mechanism/system to substitute the redundant component into the sub- system, and the switching system can fail itself. If the switching system fails at the time of component replacement, the subsystem (and thereby the entire system) fails while there may still exist redundant standby components that have not yet been used. Accordingly, the reliability of the switching system is considered to be a weakness of the standby and mixed strategies, as it has an important and decisive role in their performance.    The main contribution that the K-mixed strategy intends to make is to introduce a new strategy that is less sensitive to switch reliability. This strategy can then be expected to improve system reliability. In the proposed K-mixed strategy as a general form of the mixed strategy, all the active components start operating at time zero. When the first active component fails, the switching system immediately replaces the failing component with the first standby one available. This is where the mixed and the K-mixed strategies show their main difference. While the mixed strategy in this same situation (i.e., when the first active component fails) activates no standby component and the system continues working using the remaining active components, the K-mixed strategy replaces the failed component with the first standby one available. When the next active component fails, it is replaced with the next standby component available, and so on. The procedure continues until all the redundant components are activated and added to the subsystem [2]. In other words, the K-mixed strategy strives to keep a specific number of components in the active mode (i.e., the initial number of active components) as long as possible. From this point onward, the subsystem works with the remaining active components. Subsequently, the subsystem fails when the last active component fails.    Fig. 2 illustrates the proposed subsystem with the K-mixed redundancy strategy in both structures I and II (compared to Fig. 1). It is seen that the number of active components is considered in the K-mixed strategy to be the same as that in the mixed one. It should be noted that only one component in this structure is required at any given time for the subsystem to operate.    In structure II, the system starts its operation with two active and two standby components. When the first active component fails as detected by the switching system, the failed active component is replaced with the first standby component. This results in the subsystem still operating with two active components. When the second failure occurs, the failing component is replaced with the last standby component and the subsystem continues again with two active components. When the third failure arrives, no standby component is available anymore and the subsystem must, therefore, operate with only one active component. The subsystem then fails with the next component failure.    In redundancy strategies with standby components (i.e., standby, mixed, and K-mixed strategies), a switching mechanism or failure detection system is required to detect the failure of a component and to replace it with a standby one. However, the switching mechanism is itself subject to failure. It is, therefore, more realistic and reasonable to consider the reliability of system regarding the switching failure. Coit [4] described two distinct scenarios for an imperfect switching system. In scenario I, the failure detection is continually monitored to detect a failing component and to replace it with a redundant one. In this scenario, the switch can fail at any time and switch reliability is a non- increasing function of time (老(t)) and switch reliability does not depend on the number of required switches. In scenario II, the switching system can only occur in response to a failure. Failure of the switching system occurs with a constant probability (老) when the switch is required.    There is a significant difference between the K-mixed strategy and the mixed strategy with respect to the switching system. In the mixed strategy, the switching system is activated when the last active component fails and switching failure, therefore, results in subsystem/ system failure. In the K-mixed strategy, however, the switching system is used to substitute a redundant component when the first active one fails. In all the possible combinations, it is assumed that the switching system follows the second scenario and that it is triggered only in response to component failure. If the switch fails upon triggering, then it does not switch on the standby component even if it is repaired until the next failure triggers the switch back into operation. This procedure has two advantages. First, the subsystem/system is still operating when the switching system fails. Second, there is enough time to repair or replace the switching system. This is while the repair time or the time for replacing the switching system is considered to be short. Regarding the new proposed strategy, there is a decrease in the probability that the system fails due to switching failure. This study is an attempt to minimize the required number of switching operations which may result in direct subsystem failure.2.2. Reliability model    As explained in Section 2.1, there are 2 different forms of the K-mixed strategy for a subsystem with four components; they include: I) three components in the active mode and one in the standby mode; and II) two components in the active and two in the standby mode. Regarding the complexity of the K-mixed strategy formulation, this specific subsystem is considered and the formulation is described in more detail in order to provide a better demonstration of the formulation. The K-mixed formulations for the proposed subsystem with imperfect switching in structures I and II are defined by Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively. The times-to-failure of all the components follow an exponential distribution. Detailed procedures of obtaining these equations are presented in Peiravi et al. [22].    In the K-mixed strategy, the reliability formulation for each subsystem depends entirely on the number of active and standby components. The following formula describes a subsystem of structure I with four components (3 active and 1 standby).    Formula for a subsystem with 4components    The reliability of a subsystem of structure II with four (2 active and 2 standby) components is given by Eq. (7):    where, 老is the failure-detection/switching reliability for scenario 2 which is a constant value, (1 ? 老) is the probability that the failure-detection/switching does not work, and ri(t) is the reliability of the component used in subsystem i at time t. Since the component time-to-failure follows an exponential distribution, ri(t) is calculated as follows:    pdf for the minimum failure time of active components which is calculated as follow:    In Eq. (4), f(t)is the probability density function of time-to-failure for the components and F(t)is the cumulative distribution function. In Eqs. (1) and (2), subsystem reliability is the sum of probabilities associated with mutually exclusive events that lead to successful subsystem operation during the mission time t.    Changes in the number of components or the combination of active and standby components lead to changes in the formulation of the K-mixed strategy. It is clear from the example that when the number of active components is changed from three to two, the reliability formulation changes correspondingly and the number of probabilities increases from six to eight segments. Therefore, there exists no fixed number of terms for the reliability formulation in each subsystem so that the formula must be developed and extended for each subsystem based on its own redundancy level.    Active components have different starting times in some cases; this is important for calculating f(u) that shows the minimum failure time of the active components. In these conditions, if the component time-to-failure follows an exponential distribution, it can be assumed that all the components start working at the same time because of the memoryless property of this distribution; hence, Eq. (4) is justified. For other distributions, calculation of f(u) is more complicated.    The formulation of mixed strategy in the second switching scenario is given by Eq. (5) [2]:    where, f(t) is the pdf for the maximum failure times of number of failures of a component in the subsystem and is calculated as follows:    RAP belongs to the NP-Hard class of problems, so it is hard to obtain an exact solution [1]. It is even more difficult to solve the problem using the proposed mathematical model for the K-mixed strategy. A GA as an efficient meta-heuristic algorithm is, therefore, developed in this paper for the optimization of the problems.3. Mathematical model for RAP    Significant research has been directed toward well-known bench- mark problems, including series system, series-parallel system, parallel- series system, and complex system ones. In this paper, a series-parallel system made up of 14 subsystems is considered from the literature. In such a system, each subsystem, i, can have its own unique number of active and standby redundancies considered as a decision variable. There are multiple choices of components available in each subsystem, but only one type of component with an unlimited supply is allowed to be used. Each type has its own levels of such parameters as reliability, weight, and cost. The objective is to maximize system reliability by determining the best strategy and the number of active and standby components in each subsystem based on weight and cost limitations.    The assumptions of the mathematical model are as follows:    Components are non-repairable.    The components＊ time-to-failure follow an exponential distribution.    The components and the system are two-state (good or bad) ones.     Each component's failure is independent of others and does not cause damage in them.    All the components in each subsystem are identical.     The subsystem has an imperfect switching system.    The switching system is replaceable or repairable and the switch works as perfectly as a new one after each replacement or repair.     The second scenario of switching (detection and switching only at the time of failure) is considered for the switching system.    The mathematical formulation for the proposed problem runs as follows:    Eq. (7) specifies the objective function which contains the component type, redundancy level, and the best redundancy strategy for each subsystem to achieve maximum system reliability. Constraints on cost and weight are given by Eqs. (8) and (9), respectively. System reliability is calculated using Eq. (11) in which the second scenario of switching (i.e., switch activation only in response to a failure) is considered.    where, RMixed and RK?Mixed are equations for calculating the reliability of the subsystems with mixed and K-mixed strategies.4. Genetic algorithm    GA belongs to the family of meta-heuristic algorithms successfully employed for the optimization of combinatorial problems due to its simplicity and practicality. In this paper, a powerful GA with an efficient encoding procedure is applied for solving the proposed model when all kinds of strategies with different type and number of components can be selected for individual subsystem. GA has different characteristics such as solution encoding, objective function, crossover and mutation which are described in the following subsections.4.1. Solution encoding    A new efficient chromosome is chosen to represent the possible solutions which consist of selected component and redundancy level for each subsystem. This solution encoding is represented in a 2 ℅ s matrix. The first and second rows represent the type and number of selected components, respectively. An example of encoding solution for this problem with s = 14 is shown in Fig. 3.    The main point about this encoding is that all possible strategies which can be applied to the subsystem by considering the redundancy level are considered. Then, the reliability of subsystems by using different strategies is calculated. The strategy which leads to a higher reliability for the subsystem is selected. For example, in subsystem number five, 4 parallel components are considered. All redundancy strategies include active, standby, mixed and K-mixed can be applied to this subsystem. Therefore, the best strategy with the higher reliability must be determined by the algorithm. In previous studies, the redundancy strategy has been considered in the solution encoding and it makes the solution space more complicated.4.2. Objective function    After the solutions are generated, their fitness functions are calculated by considering the penalty for constraint violations. In order to transform an infeasible solution to a feasible one in the next iterations of the algorithm, a dynamic penalty function is implemented. In this method, infeasible solutions are penalized by reducing their fitness value regarding to their violation level. Also this penalty function encourages the population to seek the feasible region and near the border of feasible region. The penalty function used here is based on research in [2].4.3. Crossover and mutation    In this section, double-point crossover and a modified version of max?min crossover proposed by [16] is applied. The mutation operator is used to increase diversity and prevent premature convergence into a local optimization solution. In this paper, besides the simple mutation, a max-min mutation operator is performed [2,16].5. Numerical results    In order to demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed K-mixed strategy, it is initially applied to three different subsystems and then to a well-known benchmark problem. The three different subsystems are considered to have 2, 3, and 4 components and the reliability values for the components and the switching system are assumed to vary over a wide range. The benchmark problem is a series-parallel system with 14 subsystems originally due to Fyffe et al. [23] which was later modified by Coit [4] and subsequently used by many researchers [2?4,16?20,24].5.1. Three different subsystems    The reliability of a specific system depends on different parameters as component reliability, switch reliability, redundancy level, and redundancy strategy. The present section investigates the effects of these parameters on the reliability of a subsystem. In these analyses, three different subsystems with 2, 3, and 4 components are considered and the reliability of different strategies in each subsystem is calculated based on different combinations of component and switch reliabilities. The objective is to derive the relationships among the different para- meters of the system and the best strategy in different situations. The following ranges are considered for component and switch reliabilities:     Component reliability: [0.95, 0.93, 0.90, 0.85, 0.80, 0.75, 0.70, 0.65, 0.60, 0.50, 0.40, 0.30]    Switch reliability: [0.99, 0.95, 0.90, 0.85, 0.80, 0.75, 0.70, 0.65, 0.60, 0.50, 0.40]    In previous studies of RAP in which this benchmark problem was considered, the optimal structure always used 2, 3, or 4 components in each subsystem and component reliability ranged over [0.80, 0.95]. In this paper, these three different levels of components are, therefore, considered as three different subsystems and the efficiency of each strategy is evaluated. The results are, finally, compared with those obtained from implementing the K-mixed strategy on the benchmark problem.    All the combinations of component and switch reliabilities are considered and the reliability of each of the four strategies is calculated for each combination and compared. In each combination, the reliability values of different strategies are calculated and sorted in a descending order. The problem is solved with 11 different values for switch reliability and 12 different values for component reliability. This yields 132 test problems. All the different combinations are presented in three 12 ℅ 11 tables, in which the rows represent switch reliability and columns represent component reliability. The results obtained for the subsystem with 4, 3, and 2 components are presented in Figs. 4, 5, and 6, respectively. Each cell in these tables represents the order of different strategies from the best to the worst one. The abbreviations used in these tables are presented in Table 2.    For more clarification, Figs. 4?6 are presented in different colors, with green representing the range in which standby strategy leads to better results, blue denoting the combinations in which the mixed strategy leads to better result, yellow representing the ranges in which the new strategy (K-mixed) results work better than others, and finally brown indicating the active strategy as the best one.    As shown in Figs. 4 and 5, the active and standby strategies exhibit better performances at the corners of the matrixes (i.e., highly reliable components with a weak switch, or a highly reliable switch with weak components). In most of the combinations, however, the proposed K-mixed strategy outperforms others. It is worth mentioning that the mixed and K-mixed strategies can be de?ned for subsystems with more than 2 components while in a subsystem with two components, only the active and standby strategies can be de?ned.    Figs. 7?9 present the effects of the switching system on the different strategies for all the three proposed subsystems. These figures also demonstrate the reliability values of different strategies for a switch reliability reduced from 0.99 to 0.40 and a component reliability fixed at 0.65. Clearly, the standby strategy is the one most sensitive to switch reliability followed by the mixed strategy (in structure II). The active strategy is not sensitive to switch reliability because it does not use any switching system. It is interesting to note that the K-mixed strategy in its first structure is somehow unaffected by switch reliability and may be considered as a reliable strategy. Therefore, if the switching system is not reliable, then the proposed K-mixed strategy is beneficial for the system.5.2. Series-parallel system    In this subsection, the famous series?parallel system in RAP is investigated and the K-mixed strategy is implemented on this benchmark problem. The series?parallel system consists of 14 subsystems in each of which three or four component choices with predetermined cost, weight, and reliability are available. The input data for this benchmark is presented in Table 3. The purpose is to maximize system reliability at a given 100 units of time by considering constraints on system cost (C = 130) and system weight (W = 170). It is assumed that the failure detection and switching hardware activate the redundant component only in response to a failure.    In order to analyze the efficiency of different strategies, particularly the proposed K-mixed one, considering changes in switch reliability, the benchmark problem is solved for the different switch reliability values of 0.99, 0.95, 0.90, and 0.85. The main goal is to investigate the capability of the new strategy to cope with different situations. A second goal is to evaluate the performance of the different strategies studied by changing the switch reliability value. More specifically, it is interesting to observe how the best strategy for a subsystem might change with changes in switch reliability values.    In order to make a clear comparison of the proposed and the conventional strategies, for each value of switch reliability, the problem is solved in two situations:    Situation I: The subsystems can use only the conventional redundancy strategies; i.e., standby, active, and mixed,    Situation II: In addition to the conventional strategies, the subsystems are allowed to use the K-mixed strategy.    The proposed GA is used to solve the benchmark problem in each situation. The problem is solved then in five trials and the best solution is taken as the final solution. The best solution with maximum reliability is subsequently chosen for comparisons between the two different situations. Four different values are considered for switch reliability. The results obtained for each value are presented below.    We begin with a switch reliability of 0.99 that was also used in all previous studies of the benchmark problem in question [2?4,16?20,24]. The problem is solved in the two situations (i.e., with and without the K-mixed strategy) and the results are reported in Table 4.    Ardakan and Hamadani [2] considered the same benchmark problem and employed a mixed strategy to find an optimal solution with a reliability of 0.992328. They assumed that the component time-to- failure (TTF) followed an Erlang distribution. For the K-mixed strategy, we assume that all the component TTFs follow an exponential distribution. Therefore, in this paper, the mixed strategy is also considered with an exponential TTF so that exhaustive comparisons are possible to make. For other problems, the same procedure is applied and the best solutions are obtained. The benchmark problem is formulated and solved by considering the mixed strategy with an exponential distribution. The structure of the best solution obtained in this paper for the benchmark problem with an exponential TTF is the same as that obtained by Ardakan and Hamadani [2] and the reliability of the best solution with an exponential TTF is equal to 0.98194689. Thus, the same best structure is obtained for this problem with either an Erlang or an exponential TTF.    The benchmark problem is then solved with the proposed K-mixed strategy applied to the system. The optimal structure is observed to be almost the same as the previous one and the three conventional strategies, but the K-mixed one, are used in all the subsystems. This result was predictable from Figs. 4?6. However, the GA developed in this paper finds a solution with a better reliability (i.e., 0.982022) compared to the best solution obtained in previous studies [2]. When component TTF in this new solution is changed to an Erlang distribution, the system reliability is equal to 0.992335, which is greater than the one (0.992328) obtained by Ardakan and Hamadani [2]. Table 4 shows the results of the comparisons between the two situations when a switch reliability of 0.99 is adopted.    According to Table 4, the mixed strategy outperforms the K-mixed one while this strategy is also used in all the subsystems with more than 3 components when a switching system with reliability of 0.99 is employed. Moreover, the proposed GA is found to be superior to that presented in [2] as it was able to find a better solution. Table 5 reports the results obtained for the proposed benchmark with and without the K-mixed strategy when the switch reliability is equal to 0.95. Because none of the previous studies considered this value for switch reliability, the results of both situations are presented here only with an exponential distribution.    As seen in Table 5, the final solution uses four subsystems with the K-mixed strategy when it is applied to the benchmark problem. This solution is distinctly different from the best structure with a switch reliability of 0.99. Comparison of the results for Situations I and II reveals that the K-mixed strategy improved the overall reliability of the system. These results are in complete agreement with those shown in Figs. 4?6. For example, the second subsystem uses two components with the active strategy while it is shown in Table 6 that the best strategy for this value of switch reliability (0.95) and two components is the active one.    These results are also in complete agreement with our findings reported in Figs. 4?6 where it is seen that the best redundancy strategy for each subsystem depends on component reliability when the switch reliability is fixed. For example, in the first subsystem, three components of type 3 are chosen with a component reliability equal to 0.91. It is clear from Fig. 5 that the best strategy in this situation is KM1 (i.e., K-Mixed redundancy strategy in structure I). For other subsystems, the results can be compared with those in Figs. 4?6. Table 6 reveals the differences between the solutions obtained for the two Situations I and II.     Tables 7 and 9 report the results obtained for the benchmark problem with switch reliabilities of 0.90 and 0.85, respectively. Comparisons of the two Situations (i.e., using conventional or the K-mixed strategies) are reported in Tables 8 and 10 for each value of switch reliability. The interesting point in these two final test problems is that, as also shown in the previous section, different strategies exhibit different degrees of sensitivity to switch reliability. It was shown that the K-mixed strategy with the structure I had the minimum sensitivity to switch reliability. As a result of this fact, the final solutions in Tables 7 and 9 employ more subsystems with the K-mixed strategy in Structure I (i.e., KM1).    Fig. 10 presents the reliability values for the different subsystems in the two situations I and II. Fig. 11 presents a complete comparison of Situations I and II for different values of switch reliability. Clearly, the proposed K-mixed strategy helps the system remain highly reliable despite the reduced reliability of the switching system. When switch reliability is lower, the overall system reliability in both Situations I and II get closer because the system prefers to use an active strategy which is not sensitive to the switching system. Fig. 12 presents the structure of the series-parallel system considering different switch reliability values. It shows how each subsystem uses the best redundancy strategy to gain the highest reliability.6. Conclusion    In this paper, a recently introduced redundancy strategy called the K-mixed strategy was investigated as a general form of the mixed strategy. This strategy can be used in all systems with redundant components. The mathematical formulation of this strategy was initially presented and a well-known series-parallel system was considered and a novel mathematical model was developed to evaluate the efficiency of the proposed strategy. The problem was formulated as a non-linear integer programming model subject to a number of constraints. The reliability of the system was then calculated in two different situations: with and without the K-mixed strategy used in the subsystems. Moreover, different values of switch reliability were considered and the problem was solved. Finally, the efficiency of the proposed strategy was investigated against each of these values. Numerical results revealed that the proposed K-Mixed strategy outperformed the previously used mixed, standby, and active strategies for most combinations of components and switch reliability. For future studies, the proposed strategy is suggested to be implemented in other reliability problems such as RRAPs.    