




Lithium dendrite growth mechanisms in liquid electrolytes




ABSTRACT

		    A unified theoretical framework of dendrite growth kinetics has been developed to account for the coupled
		effects of electrodeposition, surface tension, and elastic and plastic deformation. The contribution of each
		driving force is assessed to identify five regimes of lithium growth: thermodynamic suppression regime, incubation
		regime, tip-controlled growth regime, base-controlled growth regime, and mixed growth regime, in agreement with the
		experimental scientific literature. Tip-controlled growth shows a linear time-dependence, while base-controlled
		growth shows an exponential time-dependence. A minimum in the growth rate, as a result of the reaction energy
		barrier increase imposed on the interface by the local elastic energy, is identified in the mixed growth regime.
		Further, two characteristic times are identified: the characteristic deposition time, t∘, which defines the critical
		time scale necessary to overcome the electrochemical energy barrier for nucleation, and the characteristic
		plasticity time, tσ, which corresponds to the time scale necessary for plastic flow to occur, given a local shear
		stress. Examples of experimentally reported transitions between tip-controlled growth and base-controlled growth
		are readily captured through the proposed framework. While one or more mechanisms may dominate the growth
		of the electrodeposit, the proposed formulation defines a road map to design dendrite-free, lithium-based anodes
		as a stepping stone to identify alternate dendrite-free chemistries


INTRODUCTION

    The growth of metallic lithium deposits, broadly referred to as
"dendrites," is a major roadblock in the commercialization of high
power and energy lithium-ion batteries [1,2], as well as the emergence
of lithium anode-based and lithium-air batteries [3,4]. For currently
used commercial graphitic anodes in lithium-ion batteries, dendrites
pose a serious safety concern and have resulted in catastrophic failures,
particularly at high current densities [5]. In all cases, the safety and
performance of existing and emergent rechargeable batteries will determine
their success tied to the survival of nascent markets of electricity-
based technologies, such as of electric vehicles [6], which would
greatly benefit from lithium metal anodes, and the possibility to reduce
the charging time from the present 4 and 36 h to 10 min [7,8]. While
there has been significant progress in the fast-charging infrastructure,
the dendrite growth problem remains the primary bottleneck to implement 
high energy, fast charging batteries. In this context, thin film
(3 µm) lithium anode batteries have been developed; however, to make
them dendrite-free, alternate approaches are required to bring this
technology to the main stream [9–11].
    Fundamentally, the problem of dendrite growth remains largely
unsolved due to the fact that, unlike copper or zinc electrodeposition,
lithium grows at current densities one hundred times lower than the
limiting current density, and shifts between, what appears to be, multiple 
growth mechanisms reported over a wide variety of time and
length scales [12]. The inherent electrochemical instability of lithium
metal in organic liquid electrolytes, combined with the underlying
multiphysical and microstructural complexity of the local environment
that each dendrite is subjected to, contributes a great deal of complexities
that demand a basic science identification of the individual
mechanisms that control its stability and kinetics. These mechanisms
result in different lithium morphologies that determine whether the
sandwiched separator will be able to arrest the dendrite, or if the
dendrite will dissolve back into the electrolyte.
    Fig. 1 shows a catalog of electrodeposition experiments where the
dendrite was reported to grow either as tip-controlled or base-controlled.
For example, Brissot and Chazalviel reported two regimes of lithium
growth, (see in Fig. 1): needle-like at low current densities
(0.05 mA/cm2) after 38 h [13], and “arborescent” for high current
densities (0.7 mA/cm2) after 2300 s [14]. Dollé et al. (see and in
Fig. 1) reported that a single charge cycle at 0.22 mA/cm2 produced
mossy deposits, while a single charge cycle at 0.5 mA/cm2 resulted in
elongated dendrite-like microstructures [15]. Orsini et al. demonstrated
the growth of lithium microstructures on lithium, copper, and graphite
substrates [16]. It was reported that on both lithium and copper, mossy
growth was observed for low C-rates (C/5, 0.45 mA/cm2), while
dendritic growth was observed at high C-rates (1C, 2.2 mA/cm2).
However, for graphite anodes, high C-rates (2C, 0.1 mA/cm2) only
roughened the anode surface. Arakawa et al. were the first to propose
that lithium “extrudes” from the base [17]. Experimentally, it was
observed that lithium pushes out towards the counter electrode from the
base, where the morphology of the tip remains largely unchanged. The
authors predicted different morphologies as a function of the Laplace
pressure on the electrodeposit and its surface tension. Hollenkamp et al.
used Raman spectroscopy to distinguish growth at the tip and from the
base and demonstrated that the tip morphology remains unchanged
during base-controlled growth [18]. Seminal experiments by Crowther
and West (see ▵ in Fig. 1) showed the transition from tip-controlled to
base-controlled in a single galvanostatic recharge cycle [19], where the
growth rate was shown to be proportional to the Butler-Volmer current
density, consistent with Monroe and Newman [20]. Recent experiments
by Cui et al. [21] (see ◊ in Fig. 1) confirmed the observations as well as
predictions by Ely [22], and most recently by Bazant, Li et al. [12,23]
(see and □ in Fig. 1). Transitions between experimentally reported
growth mechanisms from base-controlled to tip-controlled [12] or from
tip-controlled to base-controlled [19], clearly outline that the mechanisms
for growth are a function of the underlying time-dependent conditions
that dendrites are subjected to. Also, additional driving forces are at
play during dendrite growth due to the lightning rod-like shielding
effects of a highly conductive elongated metallic electrodeposit [24,27].
    The first dendrite growth model was developed by Barton and
Bockris, who proposed that ion transport in front of the dendrite tip is
limited by diffusion. The authors demonstrated the existence of a critical
overpotential and described the growth of silver dendrites in liquid
electrolytes. Diggle and Bockris further extended the model for higher
overpotentials and showed transitions between spongy and dendritic
morphologies as the overpotential increased [28]. Aogaki and Makino
followed a Mullins-Sekerka type description to show dendrite growth
due to the electrochemical instability at the electrode interface for
diffusion-limited electrodeposition [29,30]. Chazalviel, Fleury, and
Rosso demonstrated that dendrites formed due to deviations from
electroneutrality at the electrochemical interface [31–33]. Dendrite
propagation velocity was shown to be equal to the anion velocity and
proportional to the electric field in the electroneutral region of the
electrolyte. Dendritic growth was attributed to depletion of ions near
the anode interface at current densities higher than the limiting current
density. At lower and battery-relevant current densities, Monroe and
Newman predicted the dendrite tip velocity and extended the ButlerVolmer
relation to incorporate elastic deformation to assess the separator 
stiffness necessary to block dendrite penetration [20,34].
Newman also demonstrated the effect of elastic energy on the electrochemical 
interface to hinder dendrite growth. Ferrese and Newman
further incorporated the effects of plastic deformation of lithium and
examined lithium movement on the anode during charge-discharge
cycles [35–37]. Ely and García rationalized the contributions from
these apparently disconnected mechanisms and unified its description
into a generalized electrochemical analytical framework that identified
three regimes of dendrite stability and growth [22]. Srinivasan et al.
recently resolved tensile and compressive stresses and assessed the
propensity of dendrite penetration under elastic deformation [38].
    In spite of the great deal of experimental evidence highlighting the
unequivocal existence of tip- and base-controlled growth of lithium, there
is no fundamental framework that explains clearly the observations. In
this context, a generalized electrochemical and chemomechanical
theory of dendrite growth kinetics is presented herein that quantitatively identifies 
the different regimes of lithium growth. Predicted regimes and time-
dependent growth behavior are in excellent agreement with experiments 
that have reported tip-controlled and base-controlled growth, and the 
conditions that lead an isolated dendrite to switch from one mechanism 
to the other one are explained


METHOD

    Define the total Gibbs free energy of transformation of a hemispherical 
electrodeposit that forms on an electrically charged mechanically stressed 
substrate, with a contact angle of 90° as shown in
the bottom right inset in Fig. 1. Here, the chemical, electrical, and
mechanical contributions to the bulk free energy of transformation are
embodied by the expression:
    Used symbols are summarized in Table 1. The state of stress of such an
electrodeposit is described by a symmetric rank two tensor, which for a
hemispherically symmetric cap is simplified in the diagonalized reference system as,
a defines the stress anisotropy and together with the principal (eigen-
stress) direction(s) uniquely quantifies the mechanical state of the
dendrite. In general, the electrodeposit is subjected to multiple sources
of stress: those induced by the SEI, whose stiffness induces an inhomogene-
ous compressive effect [39], the adjoining electrodeposits,
whose differential molar volume expansion contributions induce shear
stresses [40], the separator, which pushes down the dendrite as a means
to suppress its growth into the counter electrode [37], and the metallic
casing of the battery, which hydrostatically compresses the battery
stack [41,42].
    For σ < 0, and a < 0, Eq. (2) shows that the electrodeposit is pushed
laterally inwards while extruded upwards, and thus promotes the
growth of the electrodeposit. For lithium, σ∘ = ±732 MPa, in agreement with [45].
The electrodeposition dynamics for a stressed dendrite are formulated through
 a modified Butler-Volmer relation, in agreement with
Newman et al. [34,37,46]: upon substituting Eq. (2). Here, j∘ = i z ∘/ F is the molar 
exchange current density and α is the transfer coefficient.
    In the absence of stresses, Eq. (7) reduces to the classical ButlerVolmer 
relation for a planar deposit, Γ j α z η RT = − ∘ (exp[(1 ) / ] F
− − exp[ / ] αz η RT F ), in agreement with the existing scientific literature
[20,22].For a symmetric electrodeposition reaction, i.e., α = 1/2, Eq. (7)
reduces to: The elastic energy term contributes an additional energy barrier for
electrodeposition, in agreement with [46,47]. Thus, the state of stress,
dictated by the stress anisotropy, a, will determine the extent of suppression 
of the Butler-Volmer electrodeposition kinetics. In addition,
the elastic energy induces a shift in the critical overpotential required
for electrodeposition, i.e., for stressed dendrites, higher overpotentials
are required to start electrodeposition, and in the absence of curvature
or overpotential contributions, the stress will induce dendrite electrodissolution.
Plastic deformation of lithium, a well known phenomenon
[23,35,36,40,41,48–50], is described herein by a power law creep
model [51,52], as denoted by ε Aσ ˙s = sn. The von Mises stress is
σs = ⎡ ⎣1 2 (( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( 1) σ σ σ aσ aσ σ a σ − + − + − 2 2 2 ⎤ ⎦1/2 = − . a = 
1 indicates a pure hydrostatic state, and will suppress plastic deformation.
A A Dμ b kT 1−n / , where A∘ is Dorn's constant, D D Q RT = − ∘ exp( / ) is
the lithium diffusion coefficient, and b is the Burgers vector [52]. Dorn's
constant is a phenomenological parameter, and has been reported to
scale with the power law creep exponent, n [52]. The diffusion coefficient, 
D, accounts for the microstructurally averaged contributions from
point defects, dislocations, and grain boundaries to the stress induced
transport of lithium [53]. Thus, the plastic deformation rate is given by
dr dt rAσ / = sn, and corresponds to the non-elastic vertical elongation of
the dendrite as a result of an arbitrarily imposed state of stress.
    For an isolated hemispherical nucleus, the growth rate is denoted as
dr dt ΓΩ / = , thus the combined vertical growth rate due to electrode-
position and plastic deformation is defined as:
The function, sign(x), is defined as sign( ) x = 1 for x ≥ 0, and
sign( ) x = −1 for x < 0. Used material parameters are listed in Table 2.
    For small deviations from equilibrium, i.e.,
Dividing both sides by j∘Ω ΔG R 2 f/ T, and using
sign( ) sign( )sign( ab a b = ), the resultant dimensionless growth rate is:
̂dr dt ^ = − (1 ) Π σ η σ 1 2 2 ̂ ̂ ⎡ ⎣ ̂− − r1̂⎤ ⎦ + − sign( ) aσ̂ ̂ ΠΠ122 rσ̂ n (11)
=t t t ^ / ∘, where t∘ = −2 / γRT j Ω ΔG ∘ 2 f2, denotes the characteristic deposition
time, in agreement with Ely [22]. For dendrites whose size are in the
vicinity of the critical size for thermodynamic stability, coarsening kinetics
 govern the growth of the electrodeposit. High interfacial energies
and low Gibbs free energies of transformation will delay the onset of
dendritic growth. For lithium, t∘ = 1.514 s, in agreement with previous
work [22]. The two resultant dimensionless numbers are defined as
In this context, the tip-controlled growth regime corresponds to the
combination of equilibrium and kinetic parameters where the contribution 
from the growth rate from the applied overpotential, concentrated 
at the dendrite tip, is at least ten times greater than the
growth rate due to plastic flow. Similarly, base-controlled growth regime
is identified herein whenever the time-dependent morphological
changes induced by the dendrite's plastic deformation is at least ten
times higher than contributions from electrodeposition. The mixed
growth regime is thus defined when tip-controlled growth and base-
controlled growth contributions are both active. The growth rate is defined
to reach a minimum as a function of the applied stress when


RESULT

    Fig. 2 summarizes five regimes of growth behavior as a function of
electrodeposit size and local overpotential, for a fixed stress tensor. The
blue curve denotes the limit of thermodynamic stability, as defined in
Eq. (5). Lithium dendrites that are larger than the critical thermodynamic 
size are energetically favorable (above the blue curve). Similarly, 
lithium embryos in the thermodynamic suppression regime (below
the blue curve) are energetically unfavorable, and will dissolve back
into the electrolyte. Thus, dendritic growth will safely be avoided by
choosing overpotentials and sizes that are in the thermodynamic suppression
regime, as reported in earlier work [22], and experimentally
verified by Cui [21]. The incubation regime, between the blue and the
black curves, is where thermodynamically stable electrodeposits grow
through coarsening, following incubation kinetics [21,22]. The black
line embodies the kinetic limit, where thermally stable isolated nuclei
will grow. Three additional growth regimes are identified: the tip-
controlled growth regime, to the right of the green line, where electrode-
posits subjected to large overpotentials grow into whisker-like
structures; the base-controlled growth regime, to the left of the red line,
where hemispherical electrodeposits subjected to small overpotentials
deform into elongated structures, in agreement with the numerical
work by Arakawa et al. [56]; and the mixed growth regime, between the
tip-controlled and the base-controlled growth regimes, where lithium 
kinetics is governed by the contributions of plastic deformation and
surface energy, dendrite growth is possible, both through the base and
the tip, in agreement with Steiger et al. [25,26].
    Results show no appreciable base-controlled growth for
− σ < 0.1 MPa, thus this stress value corresponds to the worst case
scenario to observe tip-controlled growth. Similarly, − σ ∼ 5 MPa was
the stress value that delivered the best match between the experimental
results and the performed calculations. In addition, if the stress on the
electrodeposit increases, e.g., from − σ = 0.1 to 5 MPa (see Figs. 2(a)
and (b)), the extent of the incubation regime shrinks, while the extent of
the base-controlled growth regime expands. For dendrites in this regime,
the stress that accumulates at the base induces an outwardly directed
push of the dendrite towards the counter electrode. A direct comparison
against electrodeposit size as a function of overpotential experimental
data [14–16,19,21,23] (see example micrographs in Fig. 1), shows that
for a stress, − σ = 0.1 MPa, lower than the yield stress, dendrites grow
according to the tip-controlled growth regime (see Fig. 2(a)). Electrodep-
osits at the onset of tip-controlled growth regime lie just above the
black line, in agreement with experiments performed by Cui et al. [21].
    Dendritic or whisker like growth, in the tip-controlled growth regime, at
high current densities are in agreement with experiments by Orsini
et al. (2.2 mA/cm2) [16], Brissot et al. (1.3 mA/cm2) [14], and Dollé
et al. (0.5 mA/cm2) [15]. The present analysis further asserts that early
stages of lithium growth are in agreement with experimental observations
of tip-controlled growth by Crowther and West [19]. Potentiostatic
lithium electrodeposition experiments under high applied voltages
(−4.5 V) as reported by Li et al. [23] are also captured in the tip-controlled 
growth regime. For a stress above the yield point, e.g.,
− σ = 5 MPa, a comparison against experiments [14,15,19,21,23],
shows that, in general, dendrite growth occurs as a combination of
electrodeposition and plasticity-induced growth, i.e., in the mixed
growth regime. Only a subset of experiments by Orsini et al. [16] at a low
current density (0.45 mA/cm2) are found to lie in the predicted baseco-
ntrolled growth regime. Calculations further show that for stresses
much larger than the yield stress, the black line shifts downward. For
example, at − σ = 14 MPa, the kinetic (black) and thermodynamic
(blue) line overlap, thus completely altering the coarsening dynamics.
Thus, the dendrite incubation mechanism changes from electrochemically-
controlled to plasticity-controlled. For − σ > 14 MPa, the
kinetic line shifts below the thermodynamic line; therefore, the 
thermodynamic stability of a lithium nucleus becomes dominated by elastic
energy, and becomes kinetically dominated by plastic flow. For these
conditions, large hydrostatic elastic energy contributions will fully
suppress the dendrite nucleation and growth process, in agreement with
experiments [41,42,57]. 
    However, large deviatoric stresses will enable
the plastic flow along directions specified by the principal directions of
the local stress tensor. Overall, the growth direction of the electrodeposit 
will be determined by the combined contributions of the local
electrochemical gradients (tip-controlled), and the principal directions
(eigenvectors) of the local stress tensor (base-controlled). The growth
direction will be additionally influenced by the formation of kinks in
the electrodeposit [23], or by convective flow in the liquid electrolyte
[19] (See Supplemental information).


DISCUSSION

    Results show that a minimum in the growth rate (gray dashed line in
Fig. 2) exists just below the yield stress, − σ σ < = y 0.56 MPa. Physically, 
as the stress increases in a lithium deposit, the energy barrier for
electrodeposition increases exponentially, thus suppressing growth;
however, as non-hydrostatic stress accumulates on the dendrite, the
nuclei will plastically yield, favoring growth. The contribution of plastic
deformation to base-controlled growth is proportional to the dimensionless 
number, Π2, which in turn is a direct function of the anisotropy of 
the stress tensor, see Fig. 3. Calculations show that for σ < 0,
if a < 0, dendrites will be promoted to grow towards the counter
electrode in a manner analogous to toothpaste being squeezed out of its
tube. This effect is maximal for a = −2, which favors vertical basecontrolled 
growth. Deviations from this maximum value will favor dendrite 
growth at an angle determined by the principal directions of the
stress tensor and qualitatively in agreement with experimental 
observations that detail the change of dendrite growth direction
[15,19,23]. Here, the time evolution of the local anisotropy of the stress
tensor (a a t = < ( ) 0), will lead to the formation of nanostructures that
curl on themselves [15], and eventually slow down or change growth
mechanism [12,14,19], as a result of stress relaxation and dendritedendrite 
electrochemical and chemomechanical interactions. In contrast,
 if a > 0, the dendrite will be pushed downwards, kinetically
canceling base-controlled growth, in the limit of a = 1. Values much
greater than unity will plastically smear the nucleus on the plating
substrate.
    Overall, because the mixed growth regime defines a region where
both, electrodeposition and plasticity, contribute to dendrite growth in
comparable amounts, the development of electrochemical or mechanical 
heterogeneities can locally induce the formation of dendrite
morphologies not accounted for in the current theory. For example,
Steiger et al. [25,26], experimentally observed lithium growth from the
tip, the base, and between kinks, and as a result a whole new set of
morphologies was identified. In general, the strength of each of the
contributions to growth will locally impact some regions, and can easily
leave other regions completely isolated [25,26].
    Fig. 4 shows the time-dependent growth behavior for zero or low
stresses, − σ = 0.1 MPa for the case a = −2, the worst case scenario
(i.e., highest lithium growth rate) for selected values of initial dendrite
sizes and applied overpotentials. Results demonstrate that in the limit
of small overpotentials, the forming nucleus must spend 10 to 105 times
the dendrite characteristic deposition time, t∘ = 1.514 s, in order to
appreciably grow, and is thus dominated by coarsening kinetics [22].
    However, those dendrites whose size is smaller than the kinetic critical
radius, r r < k̂, will shrink and dissolve back into the electrolyte
[22,23,58]. In addition, calculations show that applied overpotentials
that are comparable to or higher than η∘ are necessary to experimentally
observe time-dependent linear growth in time scales that are comparable 
to t∘, in agreement with experiments [19,43,58]. Finally, for large
overpotentials, stress-free dendrites will develop quickly, in agreement
with [6], and will deviate from the spherical approximation after a few
instants, [24,59].
    Fig. 5 shows the time-dependent dendrite size for stress values that
are comparable or larger than the yield stress, e.g., − σ = 5 MPa. For
small overpotentials (see Fig. 5(a)), plasticity dominates the
morphological evolution of the electrodeposit, as highlighted by its
exponential growth for those nuclei that are larger than the critical
kinetic radius. The structure is dominated by base-controlled growth after
a characteristic time, tσ = 323t∘. Note that the larger the initial dendrite
size the sooner plastic deformation will become evident, in agreement
with base-controlled growth experiments as reported by Orsini et al. [16].
    For those dendrites that are comparable in size with the kinetic
radius, if the overpotential is comparable in magnitude to the critical
value (see Fig. 5(b)), the growth rate will be dominated by surface
energy contributions. As dendrites become larger, growth shifts to be
dominated by the base-controlled mechanism after the nucleus has
evolved for tσ ∼ 3000 s. Fig. 5(b) also demonstrates that dendrites will
undergo transitions in growth modes as they shift into and out of the
mixed growth regime, and accelerate its growth, even for cases where
stress and overpotential remain constant, in qualitative agreement with
Crowther and West [19] and Brissot et al. [13]. Fig. 5(c) further demons-
trates that individual dendrites will transition between multiple
growth mechanisms. Thus, dendrites start its growth dominated by the
tip-controlled mechanism, but are slowed down by surface energy forces.
    As they become bigger in size, dendrites grow in accordance to the tipcon-
trolled growth mechanism, but will ultimately grow through the basecontrolled 
mechanism, as the electrodeposit overcomes the characteristic
plasticity time, tσ. Such transitions in growth regimes explain the switch
from tip-controlled to base-controlled, at the same applied current density, 
as observed in the experiments reported by Crowther and West
[19].
    Fig. 6 summarizes the five regimes of growth as a function of local
overpotential and stress and depicts the shift in growth regimes as the
electrodeposit size increases. In agreement with Fig. 2, below the blue
curve you will find the thermodynamic suppression regime where an
hemispherical electrodeposit is thermodynamically unstable due to
surface energy, low overpotentials, or large stresses; between the blue
and the black curve you will find the incubation regime, where growth is
thermodynamically favored, but dominated by local dendrite-dendrite
electrochemical and chemomechanical interactions. Above the black
and the blue curves you will find three growth regimes: (i) to the right
of the red curve you will find the base-controlled growth regime, (ii) to the
left of the green curve you will find the tip-controlled growth regime, and
(iii) between the red and the green curves you will find the mixed growth
regime. Isolated hemispherical nuclei that are comparable in size to the
kinetic critical radius (see Fig. 6(a)), will require overpotentials that are
greater than the critical overpotential to grow through the tip-controlled
mechanism, and on the order of a tenth of the yield stress to grow
through the base-controlled mechanism. For low overpotentials
(10 0.0 −5 < < η̂ 1, i.e., 4.4 10 mV 0.44 mV) × < − < −4 η , high elastic
energies corresponding to large stresses (10 0. −3 < < σ̂ 1, i.e.,
0.73 MPa 73 MP < − < σ a), will fully suppress lithium growth (right of
the black line and below the blue line in Fig. 6(a)). For interacting
populations of lithium nuclei, those dendrites below the black line and
above the blue line will be dominated by electrochemical driving forces
and the Gibbs-Thomson effect that lead to electrochemically-induced
coarsening kinetics [22]; however, calculations demonstrate that for
large stresses, plasticity will dominate the coarsening process, when the
kinetic line shifts below the thermodynamic stability line.
    Dendrites that have reached much larger sizes (e.g., see Fig. 6(b)),
will be dominated by the base-controlled growth mechanism across a
much wider range of overpotentials and applied stresses. Also, for
electrodeposits whose radius of curvature contributions are negligible
compared to the applied overpotential and mechanical stresses (see
Fig. 6(c)), such as those experimentally observed in lithium-only anodes, 
dendrite growth will be dominated by base-controlled growth, thus
suggesting that the growth of flat layers will be morphologically unstable.
In this context, the present analysis suggests that a great deal of
electrochemical and mechanical constraints will be necessary to suppress 
dendrite growth in practical designs (see Supplemental information).
    Fig. 7 shows the time-dependent growth behavior for a = −2 and
very small electrodeposits, as compared to the characteristic electrodeposit 
size, r∘̂= 1 (0.01 μm). For large overpotentials, a hundred times
the critical value (see Fig. 7(a)) and stresses up to yield point, there is a
higher contribution from the tip in the early stages of growth, as depicted
by the linearity of the gray and green curves. At later stages,
growth is either in the mixed growth regime, or entirely in the basecontrolled 
growth regime. For overpotentials close to the critical value
(see Fig. 7(b)), the dendrite grows from the tip for a short amount of
time, and starts to grow from the base after t ∼ tσ. For overpotentials
ten times smaller than the critical value (see Fig. 7(c)), small lithium
electrodeposits (r r ̂ ̂ < k) dissolve back to the electrolyte. However, calculations 
predict that for very large shear stresses, − σ ∼ 50 MPa (red
curve in Fig. 7(c)), lithium electrodeposits will deform and will push the
electrodeposit towards the counter electrode, even in the absence of
overpotentials. Predicted growth behavior is in agreement with early
stage lithium nucleation and growth experiments as performed by Cui
et al. [21].
    Fig. 8 demonstrates the time-dependent growth behavior for an
initial electrodeposit size of ∼ 1 μm, i.e., a hundred times the characteristic 
electrodeposit size. Electrodeposits under large
overpotentials, at about ten times the critical value (see Fig. 8(a)) and
low stresses (− < σ σy) grow from the tip for a very long time. For
electrodeposits under moderate overpotentials on the order of the critical 
value (see Fig. 8(b)), there is a very short time where growth is
either in the tip-controlled or in the mixed growth regime, and switches to
base-controlled growth regime, in agreement with the work from Li et al.
[23], and from Crowther and West [19]. For smaller overpotentials,
e.g., on the order of 1/100th of the critical overpotential (see Fig. 8(c)),
moderately sized electrodeposits will undergo base-controlled growth
under moderate to high stresses (5 to 50 MPa).
    Fig. 9 shows the time-dependent growth behavior for very large
initial electrodeposit sizes, about 104 times the kinetic characteristic
size. For high overpotentials, on the order of a hundred times the critical 
overpotential value (see Fig. 9(a)) and under low stresses
(− ∼ σ 0.1 MPa), growth is tip-controlled for a very long time. For stresses
at the yield point (− ∼ σ 0.56 MPa), growth is base-controlled. For moderate 
overpotentials, on the order of the critical value (see Fig. 9(b)),
and moderate stresses, the tip-controlled contribution is negligible, in
agreement with experiments from Brissot et al. [14]. For very small
overpotentials, on the order of 10−5 times the critical overpotential (see
Fig. 9(c)), and moderate to high stresses (− > σ σy), growth is entirely
base-controlled. However, electrodeposits under smaller stresses
(− ∼ σ 0.1 MPa) will shrink back to the electrolyte (see gray curve).
    Fig. 10 describes the growth regimes as a function of electrodeposit
size and stress, for a fixed overpotential. Below the blue curve you will
find the thermodynamic suppression regime, where dendrites are therm-
odynamically unstable. Above the blue line and below the black line you
will find the incubation regime. Above the blue and the black lines are
three growth regimes: (i) to the left of the green curve and above the
black curve you will find the tip-controlled growth regime, where growth is
dominated by electrodeposition, (ii) above the blue and the black curves
and to the right of the red curve you will find the base-controlled growth
regime, where irreversible mechanical deformation, i.e., plastic deformation 
of lithium, dominates the growth dynamics; and finally (iii),
between the red and the green curves you will find the mixed growth
regime, where both electrodeposition and plastic deformation have
comparable contributions to dendrite growth. To the right of the black
line and below the blue line, very large stresses will mechanically suppress 
dendritic growth. The dashed gray line indicates a minimum in the
total growth rate as a result of the contributions from electrochemical,
chemomechanical and surface energy contributions. Calculations demonstrate 
that for small overpotentials (see Fig. 10(a)), the tip-controlled
mechanism dominates the microstructural evolution of dendrites, only in
a very narrow range of thermodynamic parameters that includes very
small and compressive stresses, and very large sizes. For larger stresses
− σ σ >y, calculations predict that base-controlled growth dominates the
kinetics, in agreement with experiments under low current densities
(0.45 mA/cm2) as reported by Orsini et al. [16].
For overpotentials that are comparable to the critical value (see
    Fig. 10(b)), the edge of the base-controlled growth regime shifts by an
order of magnitude. Thus, dendrites that are subjected to mechanical
stresses smaller than the yield point will grow through the tip-controlled
mechanism and will eventually shift to the mixed growth regime. Experimentally 
reported results [13,15,19,23] are found to lie within the
mixed growth regime, except those by Orsini et al. [16]. Finally, for very
large overpotentials (see Fig. 10(c)), calculations show that the
electrodeposit will grow mostly by adding lithium at the tip, in agreement 
with experiments from Li et al. [23]. Overall, these calculations
demonstrate that as the overpotential increases, dendrites are more
likely to transition from tip-controlled to base-controlled growth regimes,
and to spend a significant window of time in the mixed growth regime.
    Fig. 11(a) highlights the effect of stress on the time-dependent
growth rate, for fixed initial size and applied overpotential. Note that
for small stresses, large dendrites require to overcome a long characteristic 
deposition time, t∘. As the stress increases, the characteristic
deposition time is dominated by power law creep. Dendrites that start
at a size one hundred times smaller, display the same characteristic
deposition time when subjected to the same stresses (see Fig. 11(b)).
Finally, for dendrites that are marginally above the critical kinetic radius, 
the effect of stresses become much more pronounced as they
transition directly from tip-controlled to base-controlled growth, without
displaying appreciable mixed growth regime behavior (see Fig. 11(c)).
    Fig. 12 demonstrates the growth behavior for fixed initial dendrite
sizes and constant overpotentials that are comparable to the critical
value, η̂= 0.5 (−22.1 mV). For large initial dendrite sizes, growth is
either tip-controlled or mixed (see Fig. 12(a)). For dendrites that start
one hundred times smaller, display the same characteristic deposition
time when subjected to large stresses, but display a transition from tipco-
ntrolled to base-controlled growth for small stress values (see
    Fig. 12(b)). Finally, dendrites whose initial size is on the same order of
magnitude as the critical kinetic size will prefer to shrink in the absence
of local electrochemical interactions, unless their growth rate is solely
promoted by the base-controlled growth mechanism (see Fig. 12(c)).
Calculations show that under the application of very large stresses
(− ∼ σ 36 MPa), even small electrodeposits will grow through the basecontrolled 
mechanism, in the absence of any charging overpotential.
    Fig. 13 shows the growth behavior for fixed initial dendrite sizes
and constant applied overpotentials that are fifty times the critical kinetic value. 
For very large initial dendrite sizes, the growth of the
electrodeposit has contributions from both tip and base-controlled growth
mechanisms, thus the system evolves in the mixed growth regime for very
long periods of time (see Fig. 13(a)). For dendrites that are only 2000
times the critical kinetic radius, the effect of electrodeposition becomes
more evident, and the lithium nuclei take a long time to transition from
tip-controlled to base-controlled growth (see Fig. 13(b)). Finally, for
dendrites that are on the order of ten times the kinetic radius, calculations 
show that a very large amount of stress, or a large characteristic
plasticity time is necessary to bring the dendrite into the base-controlled
growth regime


CONCLUSION

    An analytical framework has been developed to rationalize the
major experimentally identified mechanisms for dendrite growth in a
liquid electrolyte. Contributions from electrodeposition, surface energy,
and elastic and plastic deformation are assessed through a thermodynamically 
consistent growth theory in order to understand the
driving forces controlling its dynamics. Specifically, five regimes of
dendrite growth behavior have been identified: (i) thermodynamic suppression 
regime, (ii) incubation regime, (iii) tip-controlled growth regime,
(iv) base-controlled growth regime, and (v) mixed growth regime. For a
single, isolated hemispherical lithium electrodeposit, linear growth
signals tip-controlled growth, and exponential growth signals base-
controlled growth. Further, the necessary electrochemical and chemo-
mechanical conditions to minimize growth have been identified,
namely by maximizing the hydrostatic contribution to stresses, and
minimizing the deviatoric contribution. The predicted regimes of
growth are in excellent agreement with experimental reports of tipcontrolled 
growth and base-controlled growth, and suggest the additional
existence of a mixed growth regime. The theory readily explains the 
timedependent transition between one growth regime to another, as 
reported in the experimental scientific literature [12–15,19,23]. Two
characteristic times have been identified: the characteristic deposition
time, t∘, corresponding to overpotential driven growth, and the characteristic 
plasticity time, tσ, corresponding to plastic flow induced
growth. For very large overpotentials, electrodeposits spend a short
amount of time on coarsening, before tip-controlled growth starts. After
the accumulation of stresses for a long time, ( ) ∼tσ in the mixed growth
regime, growth transitions to the base-controlled mechanism, where
plasticity dominates. Two key dimensionless numbers are identified: Π1,
the ratio of the chemical free energy of transformation to the thermal
energy of an isolated lithium electrodeposit, and Π2 the weighted ratio
of the deposition time to the plasticity time.
    The present theory provides an additional degree of freedom to the
interface dendrite suppression strategy proposed by Zhang et al.
Following Ely et al. [22], and by using the Gibbs-Duhem equation,
SdT Ndμ Adγ qdη ε dσ c · , for an isothermal system with
fixed applied overpotential and stress, γ γ χdμ = − ∘ ∫0μe e, where γ∘ is the
surfactant-free, nucleus-electrolyte interfacial free energy; χ is the
surface concentration; μe c = + + μ z η Ω σ E F / /2 2 , the electrochemic-
omechanical potential; and μc the traditional chemical potential
of the interface. Thus, the addition of a surfactant on a mechanically
stressed interface can be used to suppress the nucleation of lithium
embryos.
    Results suggest that mechanical stresses can both suppress or promote 
dendrite growth. Specifically, the performed analysis suggests
that through the use of existing technology such as pulse charging
[60–63], dendrites can be suppressed by minimizing the possibility of
nucleation and growth, as suggested by Ely [22]; however, for already
existing dendrites, the period of the pulses, τ, should be shorter than t∘
to minimize tip-controlled growth, and simultaneously shorter than tσ to
minimize base-controlled growth. Historically, it is well known that the
application of large compressive hydrostatic stresses has resulted in the
full suppression of dendrites [34,37,38,42,45,46]. This analysis suggests an
additional dendrite suppression design variable through the
application of compressive stresses, σ > σ∘, such that a a t = ≥ ( ) 1 for
t⪢tσ.