Investigations on the material property changes of ultrasonic-vibration assisted aluminum alloy upsetting
Abstract
Numerous studies have shown the benefit of ultrasonic-vibration assisted metal forming. This benefit include a reduction in forming forces, which might be attributed to the superposition of stress, increased temperatures, the effects of interface friction, and energy absorption of dislocation. This study conducts a series of experiments and analyses to investigate the main mechanisms of a reduction in forming forces during ultrasonic-vibration assisted A6061-T6 aluminum alloy upsetting.
The findings of this research confirm that, under frictionless conditions, ultrasonic vibration still reduced forming forces, and ultrasonic vibration can increase the temperature of specimens and soften specimen surface during upsetting. From metallographic analyses and micro-hardness tests, the results reveal that energy absorption of dislocation was occurred during upsetting, which also contribute to the reduction of forming force.
This research concludes that the mechanisms of increased temperatures and energy absorption of dislocation can affect the material property and make a reduction in forming forces; however, the interface friction effect has nothing to do with a reduction in forming forces.
Highlights
The mechanisms of ultrasonic-vibration assisted upsetting were identified. Ultrasonic can reduce the material＊s flow stress when friction is negligible. Metal can absorb energy through heat energy, making a reduction in forming force. The grains have been refined when the ultrasonic-vibration is superimposed. The motions of dislocation were occurred, making a reduction in forming forces.
Keywords
Aluminum alloy Compression test Ultrasonic vibration Mechanism
1. Introduction
High-energy ultrasonic waves have been applied to a wide variety of uses, including ultrasonic welding, ultrasonic cutting, ultrasonic metal forming, and ultrasonic die-casting. The process of ultrasonic-vibration assisted metal forming applies ultrasonic energy to a die, which is then used to deform metal specimens. Interesting effects arise when ultrasonic vibration is applied to metal-forming processes, such as a decrease in friction between die and specimen, a reduction in forming forces, and changes in the microstructure of specimens during sheet metal forming. Blaha and Langenecker [1], [2] were the first to investigate the use of ultrasonic vibration in relation to the plasticity of metals. They superimposed high-frequency vibrations onto a static load during the tensile test of a zinc single crystal specimen. In their experiment, they observed a substantial reduction in yield stress and flow stress. In similar experiments, flow stress was clearly reduced in polycrystalline materials. The SAE1019 steel experiments showed that applying ultrasonic energy to a specimen increased its temperature, an effect related to the time and amount of ultrasonic energy applied. Microscopic observations showed that grain sizes of materials decreased when ultrasonic energy was applied. The transmission electron microscopy technique (TEM) was used to observe an increase in the density and movement of dislocations after the application of ultrasonic energy to materials.
Abramov [3] investigated the effect of the ultrasonic on the material micro-structural and mechanical properties. It showed that ultrasonically induced stress in NaCl and LiF crystals with the amplitude exceeding their yield strength enhances dislocation density. When the density of the dislocations is high enough, an alignment of dislocations occurs. Kempe [4] proposed three mechanisms by which dislocations absorb energy from vibrations to reduce flow stress: (1) a resonance mechanism, (2) a relaxation mechanism, and (3) a mechanism of simple hysteresis.
Hevill [5] attributed reductions in flow stress to a stress superposition mechanism involving the superposition of steady stress and alternating stress. Our previous study [6] proved that axial ultrasonic vibration could reduce the deformation resistance of materials during hot upsetting. We found that the effect of ultrasonic vibrations on hot upsetting could not be explained by a single simple mechanism, such as the effect of interface friction, the superposition of stress, or the absorption of ultrasonic vibration energy by dislocations.
Substantial research has been conducted on the changes in interface friction in ultrasonic-vibration assisted forming experiments and simulations [7], [8], [9], [10]. Huang et al. [11] investigated the benefits of applying the axial ultrasonic vibrations of forming tools to an upsetting process using plasticine as a model material to simulate hot metal. In their study, the application of ultrasonic vibration to die reduced the mean forming force during upsetting. The researchers concluded that the stress superposition effect and reductions in interface friction contributed to this phenomenon. Daud et al. [12], [13] performed ultrasonic-vibration assisted aluminum alloy compression and tension tests using a piezoelectric force transducer to measure the high-frequency vibration tension and compression force. Furthermore, a finite element model was constructed to describe the effects of superimposing ultrasonic vibration for compression and tension tests. The results indicated that oscillatory stress superposition and contact friction were insufficient to explain the effects of ultrasonic excitation in metal-forming processes.
As mentioned in the literatures, although ultrasonic-vibration assisted forming has been around for decades, the mechanism that induces these effects is still unclear. Explanations on the effects of ultrasonic vibration include the superposition of stress [1], [2], [5], [11], [12], [13], [14], increased temperatures [1], [2], [15], energy absorption of dislocation [3], [4], and the effects of interface friction [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. These factors are usually coupled, which makes them difficult to understand. This study conducted a series of experiments and analyses to clearly investigate the main mechanisms of a reduction in forming forces during ultrasonic-vibration assisted A6061-T6 aluminum alloy upsetting. An extrapolated compression test removed the effects of interface friction between the specimens and the die, and a temperature measurement test explored the effects of increased temperatures using an IR thermometer. Finally, this study used metallographic analyses and micro-hardness tests to investigate the effects of energy absorption of dislocation during upsetting.
2. Ultrasonic-vibration assisted extrapolated compression test
To avoid the influence of friction on the measurement of the stress每strain data, Cook and Larke [16] utilized a method of the extrapolated compression test, which applied compression force to cylinder specimens with four different ratios of initial diameter to height (d0/h0) from 0.5 to 4 under identical loading conditions. If the diameter of the specimens is kept constant, the height of the specimens increases, resulting in a reduction in interface friction. When the height of specimens approaches infinity, interface friction becomes negligible. The deformation of the cylinder specimens therefore remains uniform during compressions (Fig. 1).
he compression strains obtained with different d0/h0 ratios are linear and can be extended to the origin point. When d0/h0 reaches 0, the specimen heights are infinite and the effect of interface friction in this strain data becomes negligible. Using this method, additional stain data can be obtained with different loading conditions when d0/h0 reaches 0. Based on these steps, stress每strain data under frictionless conditions can be derived.
2.1. Experimental procedure
The procedure for the high-temperature-extrapolated compression test is detailed as follows. The ultrasonic vibration system and a furnace were set up on a hot bench controlled by a microcomputer server, as shown in Fig. 2. The specimens were sprayed with MoS2 lubricant and placed between parallel dies. A 20 kg preload was applied to the specimens. The heating controller was turned on. When the designated temperature was reached, it was held constant for 10 min before the experiment began. Whenever loading reached 70 kg during an experiment, ultrasonic vibration was superimposed. After compression was complete, deformation of the cylindrical specimens was measured before the specimens were removed from the plates.
Table 1 shows the material properties and the high-temperature-extrapolated compression test conditions used in the experiment. The specimens used in this study were aluminum alloy A6061 with heights of 3 mm, 4 mm, and 6 mm (equivalent to d0/h0 of 2, 1.5, and 1, respectively) and fixed diameters of 6 mm. All specimens received T6 treatment, including solution treatment and artificial aging treatment, before the experiment. Fig. 3 shows the microstructure of the specimens with heat treatments before the experiment, and the grain size of the specimens was 22.285 米m. Compression forces were set to 500, 800, 1100, 1100, 1500, and 1800 kg. A constant compression speed of 1 mm/min was maintained throughout the experiment. During the ultrasonic-vibration extrapolated compression test, the axial vibration frequency was maintained at 20 kHz and the amplitude was set to 5.6 米m.
2.2. Experimental results and discussion
Fig. 4 plots the experimental strain vs. d0/h0 results of both the conventional compression (CC) test and the axial ultrasonic vibration compression (AUC) test. The environmental temperature was set to 25 ∼C. Fig. 4a shows the results from CC when compression loading of 500, 800, 1100, 1500, and 1800 kg were applied on specimens with d0/h0 ratios of 2, 1.5, and 1. Fig. 4a also shows compression strains under a 500 kg loading condition as 0.00187, 0.00191, and 0.00194 for specimens with d0/h0 ratios at 2, 1.5, and 1, respectively. It is therefore difficult to see the data clearly from this figure. The strain when d0/h0 = 0 can be extrapolated if the strains for specimens with different d0/h0 ratios have a linear relationship. This line can then be extended to the origin point. Fig. 4b shows the results from AUC when compression loading of 500, 800, 1100, and 1500 kg were applied to specimens with three different d0/h0 ratios. By the comparison between Fig. 4a and b, the engineering strain for AUC with the loading of 1500 kg is higher than that of CC with the loading of 1800 kg. It appears that ultrasonic vibration can significantly reduce the loading. Under these fictitious geometrical conditions with infinity of the height of specimens, no friction occurs and the stress value associated with the deformation is a function only of the material＊s resistance to flow.
Fig. 5, Fig. 6 plot the stress每strain curves obtained from Fig. 4 for three cylindrical specimens of different initial heights for CC and AUC. Higher loads are required for a higher d0/h0. The results show that, under the same loading conditions, flow stress decreased and compression strain increased when d0/h0 decreased. This was because interface friction was reduced when d0/h0 decreased and specimen height increased.
Fig. 7 shows a comparison of the stress每strain curves for CC and AUC under frictionless conditions. At the same loading of 1500 kg, true strain in AUC was 18.72% higher than that in CC. True stress in AUC, however, was lower by approximately 59.73 MPa. This shows that ultrasonic vibration can still effectively reduce material flow stress under frictionless conditions. Mechanisms other than friction must therefore be responsible for the reduction in flow stress caused by ultrasonic vibration.
Fig. 8 plots the stress每strain curves from extrapolated compression tests for AUC and high-temperature conventional compression (HCC). The true stress每strain curve for HCC at 150 ∼C is close to AUC＊s curve at 25 ∼C. The reduction in flow stress from increasing the temperature to 150 ∼C is comparable to the reduction caused by applying ultrasonic vibration. This result was in agreement with the literature [17], which indicated that the flow stress can be reduced when the temperature of the specimen was increased by pure heating, and also revealed that the specimen absorbed ultrasonic energy to cause the increased material temperatures and make a reduction in forming force. To clearly explore the effect of increased temperature, the temperature measurement tests were conducted.
3. Temperature measurements during ultrasonic-vibration assisted upsetting
3.1. Experimental conditions
During compression tests, materials vibrate at high speeds. Inserting a thermocouple into specimens to measure temperature may not lead to accurate measurements because of damage to the thermocouple caused by the heat generated from vibrating materials. To overcome this issue, an IR thermometer (Raytek MX4) and a film-type thermocouple (ANRITSU ST-24 K) were used to obtain mean and indirect measurements of temperature during AUC tests. Specially designed specimens with thin (0.2 mm) wings were made to allow attachment of the film-type thermocouple (Fig. 9).
3.2. Experimental results
Fig. 10 shows the measured temperatures for the AUC tests for specimens with d0/h0 ratios of 2, 1.5, and 1. The results show that ultrasonic vibration increased the temperature of the materials. Smaller specimens had higher temperatures. This shows that the ability of ultrasonic vibration to increase temperature during upsetting is related to the size of the specimen. Smaller specimens absorb more ultrasonic energy per unit of volume, which results in higher temperatures.
Temperatures measured using the film-type thermocouple exceeded those measured with the IR thermometer. This was because the ultrasonic-vibration assisted upsetting caused ultrasonic welding. The temperatures of the specimens increased both through absorption of ultrasonic energy and through the rubbing that occurred between specimens and the die. Temperatures at the interface were therefore higher than the overall temperatures of the specimens. Furthermore, the IR thermometer measured only mean temperatures at focal spots with diameters of 6 mm. The film-type thermocouple measured temperatures around the thin wings, which was near the interface areas for the specimens. The temperatures were therefore higher than the values measured by the IR thermometer. This phenomenon was in agreement with Statnikov＊s research [15]. The high-frequency impact on the surface is accompanied by quick surface local heating. The generated thermal energy may not heat up the whole sample, but has a significant influence on the surface and improve the surface quality. Metal can absorb energy from the ultrasonic vibration through thermoelastic energy conversion [2], [18], which could make a reduction in forming force.
Additionally, results show that temperatures increased rapidly during the initial vibration stages and then decreased with time. Fig. 10c and d shows that when d0/h0 = 1, the temperature of specimens under a compression load of 1100 kg was lower than that of specimens under 300 kg. This was because vibrating amplitude decreased as compression load increased, which reduced the output energy of the vibrations.
A discrepancy in temperature was found between indirectly measured temperatures (approximately 40每50 ∼C) and inferred temperatures (approximately 150每200 ∼C) from previous tests, which indicated that absorption of ultrasonic energy was not the only factor to increase the material temperatures. Other factors, such as stress superposition and dislocation activation, might also have been responsible. To clearly explore other mechanisms, metallographic analyses and micro-hardness tests were conducted.
4. Metallographic analyses and micro-hardness tests
A number of recent studies have explored the effects of ultrasonic energy on the microstructures of materials, which revealed that applying ultrasonic energy refined the grain sizes in these materials therefore improving their mechanical properties [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24]. Liu＊s research [24] indicated that the major approach to refine the grains of specimens for ultrasonic vibration is the motion of the dislocation.
To explore the effect of energy absorption of dislocation, metallographic analyses were conducted to investigate the grain size on specimen surface. A solution of hydrofluoric acid (10% hydrofluoric acid and 90% water) was used as an etchant. A surface area of one square inch was selected on each specimen for observation. These areas were magnified 100 times and shown on a microscope screen. Before the experiment, the grain size of the specimens was 22.285 米m. With CC, specimens were subjected to compression forces of 500, 800, 1100, and 1500 kg, which resulted in grain sizes of 21.795, 21.496, 20.820, and 20.433 米m, respectively. With AUC, specimens were subjected to compression forces of 500, 800, 1100, and 1500 kg, which resulted in grain sizes of 21.371, 20.523, 18.814, and 17.530 米m, respectively. When ultrasonic vibration was superimposed on specimens, the grains on their surfaces were refined (Fig. 11, Fig. 12). The dislocation density increased during AUC, and these dislocations tangled together and the dislocation walls occurred. Finally, these dislocations walls changed into low or high angle grain boundaries, and then the original grains were refined into small grains and subgrains [3], [24]. Specimen absorbed the energy from the motion of dislocation to soften the martial and make a reduction in forming force [4], [25].
Micro-hardness tests were also conducted. Results showed that the forming process increased the specimens＊ surface strength because grains on the specimen surfaces were refined and the number of dislocation increased dramatically during ultrasonic-vibration superimposition (Fig. 13).
5. Conclusion
A series of experiments and analyses were conducted to explore and further understand the effects of ultrasonic vibration for the mechanical properties and microstructure changes of materials during ultrasonic-vibration assisted A6061-T6 aluminum alloy upsetting, and three mechanisms including the interface friction effect, the increased temperatures, and energy absorption of dislocation were clearly identified and analyzed.
The results of the extrapolated compression experiment showed that when friction is negligible, ultrasonic vibration can still effectively reduce material flow stress. Temperature measurement tests showed that metal can absorb energy from the ultrasonic vibration through thermoelastic energy conversion, which could make a reduction in forming force; however, heat energy was not the only factor. Furthermore, the results of metallographic analyses and micro-hardness tests indicated that energy absorption of dislocation was also occurred, which make a reduction in forming forces during upsetting.
Because of current limitations in measuring apparatuses, direct measurements of interface temperature could not be achieved. Instead of using real temperature measurements at the interface, this study relied on indirect and average local temperature measurements to understand the thermal effects of ultrasonic vibration. A more precise measuring method should be used in the future to accurately explore the relationship between ultrasonic vibration and temperature increase in specimens. Further investigation on the effects of the superposition of stress will be conducted to develop the full mechanisms of ultrasonic vibration upsetting.
A model to characterize acoustic softening during ultrasonic consolidation
Abstract
Ultrasonic consolidation (UC) is a solid state bonding process in which thin metal foils are bonded under the influence of ultrasonic vibration and pressure. Large parts can be made by placing foils side by side or by stacking layers to create thicker parts. Thermal and acoustic softening of metals during UC leads to increased plastic deformation and plays an important role in bond formation. In this work, a thermo-mechanical finite element model is developed to quantify the degree of thermal and acoustic softening occurring in Al 1100-0 foils during UC. The model uses experimentally measured temperatures and changes in the foil's geometry during UC to quantify the amount of thermal and acoustic softening. Acoustic softening is shown to reduce the yield stress of Al 1100-0 foils by up to 82%. In addition, thermal softening is found to be relatively minor, typically less than 5% of the total material softening. This method to quantify acoustic softening during UC allows for a better overall understanding of the bonding process and allows several aspects of the UC bonding process to be optimized and improved.
Keywords
Ultrasonic consolidation Acoustic softening Thermo-mechanical analysis Aluminum
1. Introduction
Ultrasonic consolidation (UC) is a bonding process in which two materials are joined under the influence of ultrasonic vibrations and pressure. A foil and a substrate or multiple foils are bonded together by a sonotrode that applies pressure and ultrasonic vibrations as shown in Fig. 1. Three adjustable process parameters influence UC weld properties; they are (i) the sonotrode's clamping force (Fc) in the negative z-direction, (ii) the sonotrode's oscillation amplitude (竹) at a frequency (f) in the x-direction, and (iii) the sonotrode's speed (S) in the y-direction. A rough knurl pattern on the sonotrode prevents relative displacement at the sonotrode每foil interface and causes bonding to occur only at the foil每substrate interface.
UC is similar to the automated tape placement (ATP) process used for thermoplastic materials described in detail by Pitchumani et al. (1997). In their work, optimum ATP process conditions were identified in order to maximize the buildup of inter-layer bond strength during the process. A related work by Tierney and Gillespie (2006) investigated how the choice of process parameters in ATP leads to the development of intimate contact between parts and ultimately the final strength of the part. Similarly in UC, the choice of process parameters also influences the bond strength. UC bonds produced at low 竹 and Fc are generally weak. On the other hand, bonds produced at high 竹 and Fc can cause excessive deformations and misalignment in the part, resulting in poor bond quality. In order to create high strength UC bonds, it is essential to identify the proper weld parameters for a given material type and material geometry. This was shown by Kong et al. (2003) for Al 6061 where peel testing of UC bonds was conducted in order to determine a window of optimum UC process parameters for the material. A similar study was also done by Kong et al. (2004) for Al 3003.
UC is a low temperature solid-state bonding process in which thick parts can be fabricated by building up the thickness one layer at a time. There are many advantages in using UC over other welding techniques. Koellhoffer et al. (2011) measured the temperature of UC using an infrared camera and reported that temperatures during UC are typically less than 50% of the material's melting temperature. Yang et al. (2009) used a scanning electron microscope to examine the microstructure of UC bonds and found no evidence of melting, indicating that bonding is a solid-state process and that the materials would retain much of their original microstructure. The low temperature bonding process has the advantage of significantly reducing residual stresses in parts made with UC. The low temperatures of UC also allow thermally sensitive materials to be embedded into structures. A unique benefit to using UC over other welding techniques is that two dissimilar materials can be bonded during the process. This was shown by Obielodan et al. (2011) where the lap shear strength of commercially pure titanium and aluminum alloy 3003 dual-material structures was optimized.
The fundamental bonding mechanisms of UC are currently not fully understood; however, plastic deformation is accepted by many to be an important factor in bond formation during UC. de Vries (2004) investigated the mechanics of ultrasonic welding through mechanical modeling, a shear force sensor and an infrared camera. It was concluded that plastic deformation, heat generation, normal force and shear force all play an important role in bond formation. Kong et al. (2005) investigated the interface of UC bonds through optical microscopy and found that increased plastic deformation in Al 6061 foils leads to an increased linear weld density and therefore greater bond strength. In their work, linear weld density was determined by investigating a cross sectional cut of a UC bond and calculating the percent of the material that is bonded together. Janaki Ram et al. (2006) performed a similar study using Al 3003 foils and also found that UC process parameters that resulted in the largest amount of plastic deformation also had the greatest linear weld density. Yang et al. (2009) noted that plastic deformation at the interface during UC aids in the removal of oxide surface layers and facilitates bonding. Plastic deformation is an important part of the UC bonding process since it allows the two surfaces to come into intimate contact and aides in breaking apart oxide layers and contaminants. Only once the two materials are in intimate contact can bonding can occur. Plastic deformation during UC brings more material into intimate contact and increases the area over which bonding can take place. Thermal and acoustic material softening are an important part of the UC bonding process since they lead to increased plastic deformations in the foil and consequently could result in higher bond strengths.
Acoustic softening is the reduction in the apparent static stress necessary for plastic deformation in a material under the influence of ultrasonic energy. Langenecker (1966) performed tension tests on several materials under the influence of ultrasonic energy. It was found that acoustic softening of the material occurs immediately upon application of the ultrasonic energy and ends immediately upon removal of the ultrasonic energy. In addition, at a sufficient level of ultrasonic energy, the yield stress of a material can effectively be reduced to zero. Kirchner et al. (1984) performed quasi-static compression tests of Al 6061 and also reported a similar reduction in yield stress under the presence of ultrasonic irradiation. Izumi et al. (1966) have shown that acoustic softening occurs during compression testing of a wide range of materials including aluminum, copper, silver, steel, lead and magnesium under the influence of ultrasonic energy.
The fundamental mechanisms responsible for acoustic softening have been investigated by many researchers, but due to the complexity of the process, a clear consensus has not emerged. The following mechanisms have previously been suggested to explain the apparent reduction in yield stress due to acoustic softening: stress superimposition, volumetric energy absorption of dislocations and surface friction effects. Malygin (2000) investigated stress superimposition as an explanation of the experimentally observed acoustic softening. The stress superimposition theory states that oscillatory stresses induced by ultrasonic vibrations are added onto the static loading, making the material's yield stress appear lower during experimental measurements. Malygin (2000) concluded that the stress superimposition method adequately described the acoustic softening effect. Cai (2006) states that the stress superimposition method is not easy to verify experimentally since detailed dynamic stress profiles within acoustically softened specimens would be required. Cai (2006) investigated stress superimposition through numerical methods by modeling the dynamic stress profiles of metals under the influence of ultrasonic vibrations; however, this work did not consider the influence of energy absorption of dislocations on acoustic softening. The coefficient of friction between two surfaces is reduced under the influence of ultrasonic vibrations and can lead to a reduction in the force required for deformation to take place. Ashida and Aoyama (2007) studied the effects of ultrasonic vibration on press forming and found that the ultrasonic vibrations reduced the coefficient of friction at the surface between the sheet metal and the die.
Langenecker (1966) found that significantly less ultrasonic energy is needed to soften a material than thermal energy, suggesting that the ultrasonic energy must be absorbed primarily by the dislocations of metal grains, rather than uniformly throughout the material like thermal energy. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to observe the change in dislocation density and structure after the application of ultrasonic energy. Hansson and Tholen (1978) also used TEM to observe a change in dislocation microstructure of aluminum under the influence of ultrasonic energy. Langenecker (1966) hypothesized that localized short timescale heating may occur in a material as energy is absorbed by dislocations and that this localized heating may be responsible for the reduction in yield stress; however, Sriraman et al. (2011) monitored temperatures during UC with a thermocouple recording at 10 kHz and found no evidence of localized short timescale heating. Daud et al. (2007) compared a finite element model of acoustic softening during tension and compression tests of aluminum with experimental measurements. It was concluded that stress superimposition and interfacial surface effects do not account for the experimentally observed acoustic softening and that energy absorption at dislocations is an important mechanism of acoustic softening. Hung and Lin (2013) experimentally investigated the material property changes of aluminum during ultrasonic vibration and also concluded that energy absorption at dislocations is an important mechanism in acoustic softening.
The two process parameters that affect the amount of ultrasonic energy during UC 每 and therefore the amount of acoustic softening 每 are the oscillation amplitude (竹) and the frequency (f). Few previous works have focused on quantifying acoustic softening over a wide range of process parameters. The previously mentioned acoustic softening study by Daud et al. (2007) was limited to only one amplitude and one frequency. Izumi et al. (1966) performed compression tests under the influence of ultrasonic irradiation and found a linear relationship between acoustic softening and the amplitude of vibrations. This relationship is not directly applicable to UC for two reasons: (i) ultrasonic vibrations in their study were parallel to the static loading direction, whereas in UC ultrasonic, vibrations are perpendicular to the static loading direction and (ii) the relative motion between the two surfaces during UC complicates the acoustic softening process since a portion of the input amplitude is absorbed by the material and the rest dissipates at the sliding surface. In addition, amplitudes only up to 20 米m were studied by Izumi et al. (1966), whereas during UC, amplitudes over 40 米m are often needed to create strong bonds. Yao et al. (2012) investigated the mechanism of acoustic softening in commercially pure aluminum using a model based on thermal activation theory and found good agreement with experimental measurements. Yao et al. (2012) also found a linear relationship between acoustic softening and oscillation amplitude during compression tests, but the study was limited to a narrow range of parameters: only amplitudes up to 6 米m at a frequency of 9.6 kHz were studied.
Several previous numerical studies on the mechanics of UC have not taken into account acoustic softening. Without knowledge of the amount of acoustic softening during UC, stresses and plastic deformation cannot be accurately modeled. Doumanidis and Gao (2004) studied plastic deformation and stresses at the bond interface during ultrasonic welding through finite element modeling without including acoustic softening. Similarly, Elangovan et al. (2009) studied stress fields and volumetric heat generation due to plastic deformation during UC using a finite element model without accounting for acoustic softening during the process. Zhang and Li (2009) used thermo-mechanical modeling to study the mechanics of the bonding interface during UC. Acoustic softening was not accounted for in the model and it was concluded that only thermal softening at the interface was responsible for the material softening.
Acoustic softening during UC has been previously modeled by Siddiq and Ghassemieh (2008), but their work investigated a small range of process parameters and was validated using only a small set of experimental data by Langenecker (1966) that was not specific to UC. Pal and Stucker (2012) used a dislocation density based constitutive model in order to predict deformations of Al 3003-H18 foils during UC; however, additional experiments are required to test the validity of the model.
The vast majority of previous works on acoustic softening have investigated the mechanisms behind the experimentally observed softening in tension and compression specimens. There is limited information on a method to quantify acoustic softening during tension and compression tests and even less that is specifically related to UC. In addition, previous attempts to quantify acoustic softening have been limited to a small range of process conditions. A method to quantify acoustic softening over a wide range of process parameters is especially important for UC, since many different process parameters are used to create bonds with varying properties. The goal of this work is to evaluate in detail how various UC process parameters influence acoustic softening. A method to quantify acoustic softening under UC conditions is presented which will allow for a better overall understanding of the UC bonding process.
2. Model development
In order to model deformations in the Al 1100-0 foils used in this work during UC, the following mechanisms are included in the model: volumetric thermal softening due to bulk temperature increase, surface friction effects, strain hardening of the material, volumetric energy absorption of dislocations, stress superimposition of the ultrasonic vibrations and the clamping force.
Thermal softening during UC is caused by heat generated due to the friction at the foil每substrate interface and volumetric heat generation due to hysteresis energy loss during cyclic plastic deformation in the foil. Several previous studies have focused on frictional heat generation during UC. Elangovan et al. (2009) studied how the coefficient of friction at the foil每substrate interface influences UC process temperatures through thermal finite element modeling. Koellhoffer et al. (2011) used thermal finite element modeling and temperatures measured during UC to calculate the coefficient of friction during UC as a function of UC process parameters. In this current work, it is assumed that all work done by friction is uniformly dissipated as a heat flux over the area of contact between the surfaces. The coefficient of friction (米) during UC is a function of frictional heat generation (qfr), the horn's clamping force (Fc), the frequency (f) and the amplitude (竹) as follows:
Previous works give some insight into the expected friction coefficient trends that are seen in UC. Naidu and Raman (2005) investigated the friction coefficient trends during ultrasonic fretting of aluminum and found the following trends: the coefficient of friction will decrease with increasing clamping force (Fc), increase with increasing amplitude (竹), and decrease with increasing speed (S). These trends were also confirmed by Koellhoffer et al. (2011) specifically for UC.
In addition to friction, heat can be generated if the material plastically deforms during the UC process. Unlike friction, this is a volumetric phenomenon. Volumetric heat generation is typically considered to be small in comparison to frictional heat generation for typical process parameters in UC, as discussed by Koellhoffer et al. (2011). Volumetric heat generation during UC has been studied by Zhang and Li (2009), but this work did not account for the influence of acoustic softening on the yield stress of the material. In order to calculate volumetric heat generation, plastic dissipation (Wp) must first be calculated. Wp is related to the yield stress (考y), the plastic strain rate (), the material volume (V) and time (t) as follows (Hodowany et al., 1999):
The expression for volumetric heat generation (qvol) is given in Eq. (3) and is related to the plastic dissipation (Wp), a material dependent heat conversion factor (汕) and time (t).
Hodowany et al. (1999) investigated the value of 汕 in Eq. (3) specifically for aluminum in compression. It was found that 汕 is a function of the amount of plastic strain and ranged from approximately 汕 = 0.3 at low plastic strains up to 汕 = 0.9 at higher plastic strains. Once acoustic softening during UC is quantified using the method described in this work, the contribution of volumetric heat generation to thermal softening can be investigated.
The relationship between yield stress, strain and temperature has been studied for Al 1100-0 in compression by Hockett (1967). Strain hardening behavior of Al 1100-0 is observed along with thermal softening. As reported by Hockett (1967), the stress每strain curve of Al 1100-0 at a given temperature can best be represented in the plastic region by the power law equation shown in Eq. (4). The power law model presented by Hockett (1967) and shown in Eq. (4) is modified in this work to account for acoustic softening during UC. A percent acoustic softening term (缶) is added to account for acoustic softening due to the volumetric energy absorption of dislocations in the material. For the purpose of this work, it is assumed that all material softening during UC is due to thermal and acoustic softening.
Due to the relatively thin foils used during UC, it is assumed that 缶 is uniformly distributed throughout the material volume during the process. The following authors have made a similar assumption of a volume average in presenting experimental results of acoustic softening of thicker specimens (2每75 mm): Yao et al. (2012), Izumi et al. (1966), Kirchner et al. (1984) and Hansson and Tholen (1978). 缶 ranges from zero to one depending on the amount of acoustic softening. At a value of 缶 = 1, there is no acoustic softening in the material and it will deform normally. At a value of 缶 = 0, there is sufficient ultrasonic energy to reduce the yield stress of the material to zero. For the purpose of this work, it is assumed that acoustic softening linearly affects the K term in the power law equation and that the n term remains unchanged by acoustic softening since K is primarily responsible for significant changes in 考y.
In order to capture the effect of temperature on the yield stress of Al 1100-0, Hockett (1967) identified a series of constants for the power law model at different temperatures. These constants are shown in Table 1. Linear interpolation is used to calculate the values of K and n at temperatures between those listed in Table 1.
In order to investigate acoustic softening over the full range of process parameters and different foil geometries, it is useful to present results in a dimensionless form. First, a dimensionless amplitude (托) is defined according to Eq. (5) that is related to the peak-to-peak amplitude (竹) and the initial foil thickness (H0). 托 is related to the shear strain in the foil and in the extreme case where there is a sticking friction condition at the foil每substrate interface, 托 would equal the shear strain in the foil.
In order to study and compare UC of foils with different initial widths (W0), it is useful to convert the clamping force (Fc) to a contact pressure (Pc). Pc is related to the clamping force (Fc), initial foil width (W0) and contact length (lc) according to Eq. (6). Here, lc is defined as the distance in the y-direction that the sonotrode and the foil are in contact during UC (see Fig. 1). The value of lc is a function of sonotrode radius and foil thickness. In this work, lc was measured to be 5.4 mm and assumed to be constant for all UC process parameters for the sonotrode and foil geometries that were investigated. It has been shown in Kelly (2012) that the assumption of a constant lc introduces minimal error to the acoustic softening (缶) calculation.
Finally, a dimensionless pressure (P) is defined below that is related to the contact pressure (Pc) and the yield stress of Al 1100-0 at 20 ∼C (考y0 = 34 MPa) before its exposure to ultrasonic energy:
2.1. Thermo-mechanical finite element modeling
The amount of acoustic and thermal softening occurring during UC is quantified in this work using thermo-mechanical finite element modeling in Abaqus 6.9-2 by Dassault Systems (2009). The model accounts for volumetric thermal softening due to bulk temperature increase, surface friction effects, strain hardening of the material, volumetric energy absorption of dislocations, stress superimposition of the ultrasonic vibrations and the clamping force. The two material attributes that are needed in order to predict the temperature field and the deformation field as a function of the UC process parameters are the coefficient of friction between the foil and the substrate shown in Eq. (1) and a constitutive equation describing the material's yield stress behavior due to UC process parameters shown in Eq. (4). The friction coefficient can be determined independently by choosing a value of frictional heat (qfr) that when input into the thermal finite element model, predicts a steady state temperature that matches the experimentally measured steady state temperature. After the value of qfr that gives the best match between predicted temperatures and the experimentally measured temperatures is found, the friction coefficient between the foil and the substrate can be determined using Eq. (1). Once the friction coefficient (米) is established for a given set of UC process parameters, the acoustic softening parameter (缶) can be selected that results in a match between the experimentally measured change in the width of the foil (忖W/W0) and the predicted (忖W/W0) from a mechanical finite element model of the UC process. The procedure to quantify acoustic softening (缶) is summarized in Fig. 2.
2.1.1. Thermal finite element model
A 2D thermal finite element model in the x每z plane, as shown in Fig. 1, is used to determine the frictional heat (qfr) that is required to match the predicted temperature with the experimental values measured during UC under a given set of process parameters. The thermal model, created in Abaqus 6.9-2, uses 4479 six-node quadratic triangular elements. The entire cross section of the foil and the substrate are modeled, but only a portion of the sonotrode is modeled to improve computational efficiency since the sonotrode is very large in comparison to the foil and the substrate. In order to ensure that the size of the modeled sonotrode region does not affect the temperature distribution, a sufficiently large portion of the sonotrode is modeled such that there is no heat flux through that boundary. A fixed temperature boundary condition is applied to the edges of the sonotrode and the edges of the substrate. All surfaces exposed to air have been modeled using a convection boundary condition with a convective heat transfer coefficient of h = 5 W/(m2 ∼C) and a T﹢ = 20 ∼C. The value of h was varied in the normal range of natural convection (from 2 to 15 W/(m2 ∼C)) and it was found that it did not influence the temperature distribution in the foil due to the short time-scale of UC. Perfect thermal conductance is assumed at the sonotrode每foil and substrate每foil interfaces. The frictional heat (qfr) is applied at the substrate每foil interface. The thermal finite element model's boundary conditions are shown in Fig. 3.
Table 2 summarizes the material properties used in the thermal finite element analysis. The three required material properties are the thermal conductance (k), density (老) and specific heat (c). The substrate is modeled using Al 3003-H14 properties, the sonotrode is modeled using Ti-6Al-4V properties and the foil is modeled using Al 1100-0 properties.
In this work, it is assumed that qfr is distributed evenly over the entire contact area between the foil and the substrate. Since qfr is a function of the UC process parameters, it must be calculated for each set of weld parameters. The measured steady-state temperature (Tss) during a weld is used in combination with the thermal model to determine the qfr generated during the weld. The thermal model is executed for 1.5 s (equal to the time it takes the sonotrode to travel down the length of the 60 mm weld at 40 mm/s). For each set of process parameters, an increasing value of heat input of qfr is imposed at the interface between the foil and the substrate until the error between the experimental steady state temperature and the predicted values from the thermal finite element model are minimized. This thermal model has been validated in Kelly (2012) where good agreement was found between experimentally measured and modeled temperatures in both the transient and steady-state temperature regions of the weld.
2.1.2. Mechanical finite element model
The 3D mechanical finite element model of UC used in this work was created in Abaqus 6.9-2 (Dassault Systems, 2009) and uses the explicit solver. The mechanical finite element model accounts for volumetric thermal softening of the bulk material due to temperature increase, changes in the surface friction effects during UC according to Eq. (1), strain hardening of the material, acoustic softening (缶) due to energy absorption of dislocations and the superimposition of the vibrational and clamping stresses. Fig. 4 summarizes the boundary conditions of the mechanical finite element model.
The sonotrode and substrate are modeled as rigid bodies since both materials have a much higher yield stress than the Al 1100-0 foil. The following boundary conditions apply to the sonotrode: 竹 in the x-direction at f = 20 kHz and Fc in the negative z-direction. The sonotrode is allowed zero displacement in the y-direction and is free to displace in the z-direction. Zero rotation is assigned to the sonotrode in the x-, y- and z-directions. The substrate is assigned an encastre boundary condition (zero displacement and rotation in all directions).
In Fig. 4(b), the Al 1100-0 foil is modeled with 10-node quadratic tetrahedron elements (C3D10M). In order to improve computational efficiency, only an 8 mm length of the foil is modeled rather than the full 60 mm weld length. Node-to-surface contact formulations are defined on the top and the bottom of the foil using the penalty contact method. Tangential contact between the sonotrode and the top of the foil is defined using a penalty friction formulation with 米 = 1.0, preventing relative motion between the sonotrode and top of the foil. This sticking friction condition between the sonotrode and the foil is used because experimentally during UC there is no relative displacement between the two parts. The influence of 米 at the sonotrode每foil interface was investigated on deformation in the x-direction. It was found that the results are not sensitive to a coefficient of friction ranging from 0.5 to 1.5 as well as a ※rough§ contact formulation 每 all yield the same result.
Tangential contact between the substrate and the bottom of the foil is also defined using a penalty friction formulation. The coefficient of friction used in the mechanical model at the foil每substrate interface is calculated using the thermal finite element model and Eq. (1). A zero y-displacement boundary condition is assigned to one edge of the foil since regions of the foil that the sonotrode has previously bonded will no longer be able to displace in the y-direction. The sonotrode speed (S) in the y-direction is ignored in the simulation since it has no effect on the amount of deformation in the x-direction in the foil.
In order to increase computational efficiency, the model is executed for a time period of only 0.001 s. This time period was chosen after running the model and observing the time required for the amount of plastic deformation in the foil to plateau. The time required for the plastic deformation to plateau varies with oscillation amplitude, clamping force and the material properties of the foil. Plastic dissipation (Wp) in the foil reaches a plateau when the applied normal and shear stresses imposed on the foil become equal to the strain-hardened yield stress of the material and has been investigated in more detail in Kelly (2012).
In order to quantify the amount of acoustic softening during a UC weld, the value of 缶 in Eq. (4) is incrementally decreased until the error between the foil's width increase in the mechanical model and the experimental measurements for a given set of UC process parameters is minimized.
3. Equipment, materials and experiments
3.1. Equipment
3.1.1. Ultrasonic welder
The UC equipment used in this work is a seam welder custom built by AmTech. The welder's Ti-6Al-4V sonotrode is textured using an electric discharge machining (EDM) technique and has a diameter of 147 mm. Weld quality is controlled by adjusting the three process parameters shown in Fig. 1: the sonotrode's clamping force (Fc) ranging from 300 to 6000 N, peak-to-peak oscillation amplitude (竹) ranging from 7 to 44 米m and sonotrode speed (S) ranging from 0 to 300 mm/s. The available weld parameters allow a wide range of weld qualities to be produced. The frequency (f) of the welder is a constant 20 kHz, which is typical for many UC systems. The welder keeps the amplitude constant throughout the weld by automatically adjusting the power. The substrate, seen in Fig. 1, is held in place using a vise. The vise is used to reduce resonance effects in the substrate, which can occur with bolted substrates and leads to inconsistent weld quality and properties.
3.1.2. Infrared camera
An infrared (IR) camera is used to monitor temperatures during the UC process. There are several advantages in monitoring UC temperatures with an IR camera over other methods. The IR camera allows great flexibility in location and special resolution of measurements. Another method to measure UC temperatures, discussed by Sriraman et al. (2011), involves the use of thermocouples. In their work, weld temperatures were measured by placing a thermocouple and the bond interface during welding. Use of an IR camera has three distinct advantages when compared to using an thermocouple during UC: (i) one thermocouple is required for each data point, (ii) placing a thermocouple between weld materials will alter the weld properties at that location and (iii) the thermocouple cannot be reused afterwards.
The IR camera used in this work is a FLIR Thermovision Alert 194 and records images with a resolution of 320 ℅ 240 pixels at 4 Hz. During each weld, the IR camera is placed 22 in. from the weld in the y-direction and 2 in. above the weld in the z-direction. Weld temperatures are recorded throughout the entire weld process and the data is used to identify thermally transient and steady-state regions along the length of the weld. This work focuses entirely on weld areas at steady-state temperatures.
IR camera recordings have been conducted at frequencies up to 35 kHz, but for this work it was found that a 4 Hz recording accurately captured the weld temperatures. An IR camera frequency of 4 Hz is not sufficient to capture the heat generation and temperature rise during one oscillation at 20 kHz; however, during UC each area of the foil experiences approximately 2000每3000 cycles (0.1每0.15 s) during which a steady-state temperature is reached. Fig. 5 shows that IR camera measurements of UC are independent of frequency in the range of 4 Hz每35 kHz.
3.2. Materials
The two materials used in this work are Al 1100-0 foils and Al 3003-H14 substrates. Since the yield stress of Al 1100-0 is much lower than the yield stress of Al 3003-H14, all plastic deformation occurs in the foil and allows finite element modeling of the process to be simplified. The materials were chosen over other aluminum alloys since both have a relatively thin oxide layer, which will reduce the possibility of inconsistent welds. Yang et al. (2009) have shown that the presence of significant oxide layers can weaken or prevent bonding via UC. Al 1100-0 was also chosen since its yield stress has been well characterized over a wide range of temperatures by Hockett (1967). The material, initial width (W0), and initial thickness (H0) of the substrates and the three foil geometries are shown in Table 3.
3.3. Experimental procedure
The following experimental data is required to quantify the amount of thermal and acoustic softening that occurs during UC using a thermo-mechanical finite element model: (i) IR camera temperature measurements and (ii) the change in the foil's width during UC processing. Temperature measurements are required to calculate thermal softening that occurs during UC and to calculate the coefficient of friction between the foil and the substrate. During the UC process, the IR camera records images at 4 Hz and the sonotrode speed (S) is 40 mm/s, so the IR camera records an image every 10 mm along the length of the weld in the y-direction. From this temperature data, a steady state weld temperature (Tss) region can be identified for any given set of UC process parameters. After UC, a digital image of each welded specimen was used to measure the average width increase in the location of Tss using Image J software (Ferreira and Rasband, 2011). The average UC processed foil width is calculated in Image J by dividing the area of the welded foil by the length of the Tss region in the y-direction. The foil's processed width is the sum of the original tape width (W0) and the increase in width after processing (忖W).
In this work, an array of UC process parameters was chosen that results in a wide range of bond qualities. Five amplitudes were chosen (竹 = 10, 18, 27, 32, 36 米m) and five clamping pressures were chosen (Pc = 17.0, 28.3, 45.2, 62.0, 78.9 MPa). The sonotrode speed (S) is held constant at 40 mm/s for all sets of process parameters, since S will have no effect on acoustic softening. A total of 25 different combinations of UC process parameters were created using each combination of 竹 and Pc. Twenty-three of the 25 combinations of UC process parameters resulted in successful welding. Two sets of process parameters (36 米m, 62.0 MPa) and (36 米m, 78.9 MPa) did not successfully bond since the power required to produce these bonds exceeded the 3 kW maximum of the welder. Bonds made using the lowest 竹 could easily be separated by hand while bonds made at higher 竹 were sufficiently strong that they resulted in tensile failure in the base metal rather than failure at the bonded interface during peel testing. The full array of welds was produced using the three different foil cross sections shown in Table 3.
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Experimental results
A plot of the thermal development of a typical UC bond along the length of the weld (y-direction) is created according to the procedure described in Section 3.3 and is shown in Fig. 6. The maximum measured IR camera temperature for a typical weld is shown at each position along the weld length in Fig. 6 and a Tss region is identified from 30 to 60 mm along the length of the weld in the y-direction. The process is repeated for each set of UC process parameters and foil geometries and these results are shown in Fig. 7. The value of Tss in Fig. 7 ranges from 24 to 198 ∼C over the entire set of UC process parameters.
Fig. 8 shows an image used to calculate the average width increase (忖W/W0) using Image J after UC processing according to the procedure described in Section 3.3. Fig. 9 shows the experimentally measured 忖W/W0 for each combination of UC process parameters for the three foil geometries. All values of 忖W/W0 are taken for the region of Tss for each weld. The percentage increase of 忖W/W0 ranges from 1.3% to 24.5% over the investigated test arrays.
4.2. Model results
4.2.1. Coefficient of friction
Frictional heat generation (qfr) is calculated for each set of UC process parameters using the thermal finite element model and the Tss values shown in Fig. 7. Once qfr is determined for each combination of process parameters, the friction coefficient is calculated according to Eq. (1). The results of this calculation are shown in Fig. 10 for the 9.5 mm ℅ 0.52 mm foil array. The trends found in this study 每 decreasing coefficient of friction with increasing clamping force and increasing coefficient of friction with increasing amplitude 每 agree with the previous studies by Naidu and Raman (2005) and Koellhoffer et al. (2011).
4.2.2. Acoustic softening
The coefficients of friction shown in Fig. 10 are used in the mechanical finite element model and acoustic softening (缶) is determined by minimizing the error between the experimentally measured 忖W/W0 and the predicted 忖W/W0 according to the procedure shown in Fig. 2. To highlight the importance of acoustic softening during UC, a few selected combinations of process parameters are shown in Fig. 11. The figure shows experimentally measured 忖W/W0 in addition to predicted 忖W/W0 from the finite element thermo mechanical model for three different amounts of acoustic softening (缶).
The mechanical finite element model accurately predicts the foil width increase without acoustic softening when 托 = 0 and P = 3.40. This close agreement validates the Al 1100-0 material model and the boundary conditions employed in the mechanical model. It can clearly be seen that once ultrasonic energy is applied (托 > 0), the material model with thermal softening and without acoustic softening (缶 = 1) severely under predicts the foil's width increase. Fig. 11 clearly shows that the majority of material softening that occurs during UC is due to acoustic softening and can be quantified using the method described in this work. At an amplitude of 托 = 0.062, the average acoustic softening of the five weld parameters tested is 缶 = 0.20. All five combinations of UC process parameters fall into an acoustic softening range between 缶 = 0.17 and 缶 = 0.22.
Acoustic softening (缶) is determined for the full array of process parameters by minimizing the error between the predicted 忖W/W0 and experimentally measured values from the 9.5 mm ℅ 0.52 mm foil array in Fig. 9 using the procedure shown in Fig. 2. Individual data points in Fig. 12 show the result of this acoustic softening (缶) calculation and result in the minimum error between experimentally measured and predicted 忖W/W0 for the 9.5 mm ℅ 0.52 mm foil array. Acoustic softening (缶) of Al 1100-0 during UC is found to be a function of dimensionless amplitude (托) and dimensionless pressure (P) and can be expressed in a constitutive form as shown below:
Fig. 12 shows that 缶 decreases with amplitude (托) until it approaches its minimum value of 缶0 = 0.177. The rate at which 缶 approaches its minimum value is related to the dimensionless pressure (P): UC welds with a lower P approaches 缶0 at a lower 托 than UC welds with higher values of P. It is also important to note that acoustic softening is a non-linear function of 托 rather than 竹; therefore, a thicker material will have a lower acoustic softening than a thinner material at a given oscillation amplitude according to Eq. (8). The acoustic softening model shown in Fig. 12 can be applied to any Al 1100-0 foil geometry during UC and this is shown in the following section where the acoustic softening model is validated using the 13.0 mm ℅ 0.52 mm and 9.5 mm ℅ 1.04 mm foil arrays.
In order to validate the mechanical model, it is necessary to check the modeled decrease in foil thickness (忖H/H0) against the experimentally measured 忖H/H0. This check is made once the value of 缶 is solved for and error between the model and experimental 忖W/W0 is minimized. Once it is verified that the experimental and modeled deformations in the x- and z-directions match, it can be assumed that deformation in the y-direction will agree because of constant volume in plastic deformation. This comparison is shown in Fig. 13 for the 9.5 mm ℅ 0.52 mm foil array.
4.3. Model validation
In this section, the acoustic softening model is validated using Tss and 忖W/W0 values from Fig. 7 and Fig. 9 for the 13.0 mm ℅ 0.52 mm and 9.5 mm ℅ 1.04 mm foil geometries. Acoustic softening values calculated using Eq. (8) are used as inputs to the thermo-mechanical finite element model and used to predict 忖W/W0 for the 13.0 mm ℅ 0.52 mm and 9.5 mm ℅ 1.04 mm foil arrays. Friction coefficients, shown in Fig. 10, are also input into the mechanical model. Fig. 14 compares experimental 忖W/W0 and predicted 忖W/W0 for the 13.0 mm ℅ 0.52 mm foil array.
The average difference in 忖W/W0 between the experimental measurements and the model predictions in Fig. 14 is 0.5% and the maximum difference is 1.1%. Fig. 15 shows a similar comparison of experimental measurements and model predictions of 忖W/W0 for the 9.5 mm ℅ 1.04 mm foil array. The average difference in 忖W/W0 between the experimental measurements and the model predictions in Fig. 15 is 0.7% and the maximum difference is 2.0%.
4.4. Model insights to characterize heat generation
The acoustic softening model that has been developed can be used to investigate several new aspects of UC. For example, the relative contributions of thermal and acoustic softening to the total material softening during UC can be investigated. Fig. 16 compares the relative contributions of thermal and acoustic softening on the stress每strain curve of Al 1100-0 during UC. The most significant acoustic softening is shown (缶0 = 0.177) in addition to the highest temperature (Tss = 198 ∼C) measured during the test arrays presented in this work. It can clearly be seen in Fig. 16 that acoustic softening is far more significant than thermal softening during UC. It can be seen that without the presence of acoustic softening, Al 1100-0 at 198 ∼C experiences a significant amount of softening (25.4%) when compared to room temperature properties. When 缶 = 0.177, this same increase in temperature only increases material softening by 4.5%, compared to the 82.3% reduction due to acoustic softening. This shows that thermal softening plays a secondary role to acoustic softening during UC. Also, if thermal softening were ignored during the modeling process, a reasonable measurement of acoustic softening can still be made and the error should be no greater than 4.5% in the most extreme case.
The acoustic softening model also allows volumetric heating (qvol) to be calculated and compared to the heating contribution from frictional heating (qfr). qvol can be calculated using Eq. (3). In Eq. (3), Wp is calculated for each combination of UC process parameters using the mechanical finite element model and the time (t) is equal to the sonotrode speed (S = 40 mm/s) divided by the contact length (lc = 5.4 mm). In the case of ultrasonic consolidation, the exact value of 汕 from Eq. (3) is not critical because even at a value of 汕 = 0.9 (the upper limit for aluminum), the volumetric contribution to total heat generation is less than 5% for typical UC process parameters (托 > 0.04). At 托 < 0.04, little to no bonding of the materials takes place, so these processing conditions would not typically be used where strong bonding is required. Volumetric heat generation is small relative to frictional heat generation under process conditions where strong bonds are produced. In the extreme case, in which 托 is low and P is high, the maximum contribution from volumetric heating is found and is equal to 18%. The ratio of volumetric heat generation to total heat generation for the full range of process parameters is shown in Fig. 17.
5. Summary and conclusions
Acoustic softening of Al 1100-0 foils during ultrasonic consolidation is quantified using the experimental and thermo-mechanical modeling process outlined in Fig. 2. A relationship between material thickness, UC process parameters (竹 and Fc) and acoustic softening has been identified. A wide range of UC process parameters were explored, ranging from parameters that create very weak bonds that can easily be peeled apart by hand to very strong welds that fail in tension in the base material during peel testing. Once acoustic softening is determined for a given material and geometry using the method described in this work, acoustic softening can be calculated for any other geometry of the same material.
For the UC process parameters investigated in this work, thermal softening alone does not account for the experimentally measured tape deformations. Acoustic softening (缶) during UC of Al 1100-0 foils is found to be very significant 每 reducing the yield stress of the material up to 82%. On the other hand, thermal softening is a small contributor to the total material softening during UC (<5%). Friction is the dominant source of heat during UC. Volumetric heat generation accounts for less than 5% of all heat generated during UC process parameters that are typically chosen to produce strong bonds.
The model and experiments described in this work serve to connect the theoretical literature on acoustic softening with ultrasonic consolidation in a practical method that allows acoustic softening to be quantified during the process. Knowledge of how the yield stress of a material changes during UC will lead to a better understanding of how materials will come into intimate contact and when bonding will occur during the process.
Theoretical and experimental analyses of ultrasonic-assisted indentation forming of tube
Abstract
Indentation forming process is used for internal forming and sizing of thick-walled tubes working in high internal pressures. In this process, a mandrel with a diameter slightly larger than that of the tube is pressed and moved inside the tube, creating an internal profile. This article presents theoretically and experimentally influences of longitudinal ultrasonic vibration on this forming process. For this purpose, vibro-impact and continuous forming regimes have been investigated. Application of longitudinal ultrasonic vibration along the axis of the workpiece showed experimentally reduction of 15%每21% of axial forming forces and improvement of surface quality of the bore of the tube, while no effect on spring back of the formed zone was observed.
Keywords Indentation forming, ultrasonic-assisted forming, tube forming, slab analysis
Introduction
Indentation forming process is a simple way of little forming, ironing and sizing of internal surface of thick-walled tubes. The process is carried out by pressing and driving a profiled tool (mandrel) inside the tube. Since the diameter of the tool is slightly larger than that of the tube, the surface of the tube is formed and work-hardened.
In ultrasonic-assisted forming, ultrasonic vibration with a certain amplitude and frequency is applied to a part or whole of workpiece, die, tool, or combination of them in a certain direction or directions. This vibration can reduce friction, change strength of the material (if applied to workpiece) and change the loading mechanism and consequently reduce the forming force. In addition, better surface quality, tool life enhancement, more uniform dislocation distribution, internal stress concentration reduction and dimensional and geometric stability are the expected results of employment of ultrasonic vibration. Due to the likely advantages, ultrasonic-assisted forming has been investigated during the past years.
Blaha and Langenecker 1 studied the effects of applying ultrasonic vibration on the process of forming in 1955. Their research showed the softening effect of superimposed ultrasonic vibration on zinc single crystals, which were undergoing a tensile test. In 1957, Nevill and Brotzen 2 investigated the effect of mechanical vibration in the frequency range of 15每80?kHz on the tensile elongation of low-carbon steel wires. Their experiments showed that for a variety of amplitudes, the reduction in stress was proportional to the amplitude of vibration. In 1966, Pohlman and Lehfeldt 3 studied the influence of ultrasonic vibration on plastic forming of metals. The result of an experiment on a polycrystalline copper specimen subjected to tensile deformation, while impulses of 20-kHz ultrasound were intermittently superimposed, showed that the force drop due to ultrasonic vibration was only seen in the plastic part of stress每strain curve and not in the elastic part. They concluded that application of ultrasound under suitable conditions can considerably reduce both the external and internal forces required to overcome friction forces to form plastically metallic specimens.
Atanasiu 4 investigated tube drawing by axial ultrasonic oscillation of the plug in 1980. He found that ultrasonic affects the yield limit and causes the coefficient of friction and the coefficient of viscosity to decrease. It was also observed that the reduction in drawing force is diminished at greater drawing speeds. 4 Siegert and Ulmer 5 in 2001 investigated the superimposing of ultrasonic waves on the dies in tube and wire drawing. The results showed that longitudinal oscillation of the die at ultrasonic frequencies in the range of 20每22?kHz parallel to the drawing direction could reduce the friction. The reduction of the drawing force was found to be mainly a function of the ultrasonic amplitude. It was also found that increased drawing speed could decrease the drawing force reduction, perhaps due to decrease in oscillations per unit of length. Murakawa and Jin 6 in 2001 investigated the applicability of ultrasonic radial vibrated dies in the wire drawing process. They reported that radial ultrasonic vibration application is very effective in increasing the critical drawing speed, and it is approximately 10 times as fast as that for axial ultrasonic vibration application, making the radial vibration more productive than the axial vibration.
Hung and Hung 7 in 2005 studied the influence of ultrasonic vibration on hot upsetting of aluminum alloy. Their experimental results indicated that ultrasonic vibration could considerably reduce the compressive forces needed during hot upsetting. The reducing effect on compressive forces decreased while the temperature increased. The strain rate did not significantly affect the reducing effect on compressive forces.
In 2007, Mousavi et al. 8 studied the effects of applying ultrasonic vibration on the die during the extrusion process. They showed that the extrusion force and the material flow stress would be reduced by applying the ultrasonic vibration if the extrusion speed was below a critical speed. In addition, it was found that applying the ultrasonic vibration had no significant effect on the equivalent plastic strain of the material. A larger reduction in average extrusion force was obtained by either reducing the extrusion speed or increasing the amplitude of vibration. In 2009, Hung and Chiang 9 investigated the influence of ultrasonic vibration on double backward-extrusion of aluminum alloy. The results showed that under the effect of ultrasonic vibration, the forming force would be decreased because the ultrasonic vibration increased the temperature of the workpiece.
Susan et al. 10 in 2010 researched mechanical characteristics of stainless steel tubes in the process of drawing under different drawing speeds while using ultrasonic vibration. They obtained decreased mechanical resistance, much greater extension and increase of drawing surface quality while using ultrasonic vibration.
In 2011, Pazand and Feizi 11 presented application of artificial neural networks in investigations on the effects of ultrasonic vibration on the extrusion process. Siddiq and Sayed 12 in 2012 presented a computational study of ultrasonic-assisted manufacturing processes including sheet metal forming, upsetting and wire drawing. A fully variational porous plasticity model was modified to include ultrasonic softening effects and then utilized to account for instantaneous softening when ultrasonic energy was applied during deformation. Shan et al. 13 in 2012 presented a new mathematical model of the antifriction effect on wire drawing with ultrasonic. The results pointed out that the antifriction effect of ultrasonic had observable effects on the drawing force reduction, while the drawing speed had no visible effect on the drawing force.
In this article, theoretical relations of required axial force in indentation forming process are derived under the condition of longitudinal ultrasonic vibration superimposed on the tool in axial direction. In addition, the ratio of tool speed to vibration speed is investigated. By using these relations, effects of amplitude and frequency of vibration on axial forming force can be extracted. To prove the effects experimentally, longitudinal ultrasonic vibration is applied to the workpiece along the axis, and the results are presented.
Analysis of indentation forming process
The employed model for analysis of indentation forming is shown in Figure 1. Slab method is utilized for analysis of indentation forming without ultrasonic vibration. This method is also known as the free-body equilibrium approach or the force balance method. 14
In this process, the tool geometry consists of two parts, forging and sizing. In the forging zone, the intended internal profile of the tube is formed, and the tube inner diameter, and consequently, its outer diameter, is enlarged. In the sizing zone, both inner and outer diameters of the tube reach their final size and surface finishing is done.
The force balance method is applied on slab elements in forging and sizing zones separately under the following assumptions.
The force required for tube forming without ultrasonic vibration is as follows 14
Longitudinal ultrasonic vibration of the tool in axial direction
In order to study the effects of vibration on the indentation forming process, the tool is axially exposed to ultrasonic longitudinal vibration. The rheological model of material is used for this analysis. This reflects its real elastic, viscous and plastic properties without consideration of hardening. In addition, it aids to describe the forming process while ultrasonic is used. This approach explains the physical mechanisms of ultrasonic effects on the processes of plastic deformation. Moreover, impulsive and continuous regimes of loading have been considered in this analysis. 15 For continuous regime of deformation (Figure 2(a)), the contact between the tool and tube is always preserved and there is no separation, while for impulsive regime, there is a cutoff and separation for a short time (Figure 2(b)). For v≡a肋 , continuous regime is present. To make impulsive loading, two conditions of 2a>Ft/Ftk0k0 and v<a肋 must be established in a period. Based on theoretical relations, in impulsive loading and at low displacement speeds (v) , the force is applied to the tube at less than half of the period. While in the continuous loading, it is variable and uninterrupted during a period. Dynamic equation (4) explains the relation between the force (F), displacement (u) and tool speed (u?) of the tool. In the equations, parameters, ltube,um,忖,k0 and Ft are undeformed length of the tube, longitudinal maximum movement in a period of vibration (total displacement due to continuous forced feed of the tool + vibration amplitude), initial gap distance between the tool and the tube, static stiffness coefficient (a function of ltube ) and conventional tube axial forming force (yield force), respectively. It is noteworthy to mention that 忖<0 denotes the initial interference between the tool and the tube.
In equation (5), a,肋andv represent the vibration amplitude (m), vibration angular frequency (Hz) and tool constant feed-speed (m/s), respectively. Since the axial force applied by the tool is considered to be impulsive, by simplification and integration of equation (4) and utilizing the impact theory, the required average forming force given to the tool in the presence of axial longitudinal ultrasonic vibration of the tool is obtained as follows.
The required values of parameters in experimental tests have been shown in Table 1. The tube material was DIN CK45 (EN 1.1191), and its properties have been obtained by experiment (see Figure 3 and Table 2). After substituting these values in equations (1) and (6), the required forming force with and without ultrasonic in different vibration amplitudes and speed ratios (v/a肋) can be obtained. The axial force of forming has been shown in Figure 4.
Experimental setup
To verify the theoretical relations with and without employment of ultrasonic vibration, CK45 steel tubes, with the specification given in Table 1, were formed by using tungsten carbide indentation tool shown in Figure 5.
A setup consisting of a forming machine body, a hydraulic jack for tool feed, a tool feed driving rod, fixed and movable constraining holders, ultrasonic system and dynamometer were prepared. Figure 6(a) shows a picture of the whole system assembled and schematic representation of the system.
Machine body was fabricated from a welded structure with some adjustable bolted parts for holding and supporting the dynamometer, ultrasonic system assembly, workpiece tube and tool driving system. The constraining holders were made from thick squared steel blocks to prevent misaligning of the workpiece tube and the tool feed system during forming process. Ultrasonic system consisted of a 2-kW power supply made by MPI of Switzerland, 16 a designed and fabricated 3-kW piezoelectric ultrasonic head for longitudinal vibration (Figure 6(b)) and a titanium matching and titanium connecting part between the ultrasonic head and the workpiece for transferring ultrasonic vibration to the work tube (not to the tool). In addition, the titanium connecting part was fixed on its vibration node to support and bear the axial forming force. The fixing body holding the titanium connecting part was standing on a dynamometer system from Kistler (Type 9255B), 17 which can measure normal compressive forces up to 40 kN. The dynamometer was further supported by an adjustable strong welded square connected to the machine body by bolts.
The dynamometer is connected through interfacing unit to a computer, and the forces exerted on the dynamometer in three normal directions can be monitored and drawn against time by using DynoWare software. The MPI ultrasonic power supply to the transducer is also connected to a computer and is driven and controlled by LabVIEW from National Instrument. The amplitude and power of vibration can be adjusted in the software, and the resonance frequency of the whole system assembly is automatically measured and readjusted every 10 ms by the software/hardware of power supply.
Effect of ultrasonic power given to the workpiece on the forming force
If vibration frequency and tool feed-speed are constant, period of imposed plastic deformation exerted by the tool on the workpiece tube decreases within a period of vibration if vibration amplitude is increased. This is proved in Figure 7 in which three experimental graphs are presented. When no ultrasonic is used, the force curve stands at highest level along the whole length of the tube. At 956 W power of ultrasonic, it stands lower, and at 1705?W, it is the lowest. Decrease of 21% of axial force could be achieved in these tests. Theoretical graphs of 0, 5 (糸/a肋=0.018) and 10??m (糸/a肋=0.0092) ultrasonic vibration amplitudes, given to the tool, show a good conformity with experimental ones in which vibration is given to the workpiece. This conformity takes place in continuous deformation regimes. Under discontinuous impulsive deformation of theoretical force calculation (amplitude > 27.7??m), there is much further decrease in axial force down to half of the axial force without ultrasonic. Figure 8 presents three graphs of axial forming forces: one without ultrasonic over the whole length of the tube (NU) and two without ultrasonic at about half of the length of the workpiece tube and then switching the ultrasonic on at powers 1264?W (excitation frequency of 25,681?Hz) and 1973?W (excitation frequencies of 24,897?Hz) for the remaining length of the tube. As it is clear, axial forming force starts to decrease at the switching time of ultrasonic. In addition, more decrease is earned at higher power levels.
Effect of ultrasonic vibration of the tube workpiece on the bore dimension
The formed tube has two inner diameters (Figure 9(a)): base and formed circle diameters. The former is approximately equal to the initial inner diameter of the tube, and the latter is close to the tool sizing area diameter. It must be mentioned that before doing the tests, tubes were cleaned by ultrasonic cleaner for 10每15 min and then cleaned using alcohol and maintained in silica gel for moisture control. Two methods have been used to measure the tube bore dimensions.
Video measuring machine (VMM) operation is based on identification of dark and light boundaries; therefore, sharper edges of measuring surface improve the measurement accuracy. For using this method, small pieces of sample were cut carefully normal to the axis of the tube, and they were ground finely with burrs removed by emery cloth and then washed and dried before measurement. The pieces were placed on the VMM (KIM-CU Series; ARCS, Taiwan) table, and through adjusting its focal point and lighting, four suitable points on formed circle were selected to determine the diameter.
Percentage of spring back can be calculated from the following relation
Table 3 shows the value of spring back for the formed circle obtained by VMM with and without ultrasonic application. Ultrasonic power for the test was set at 1186 W with frequency of 25,613 Hz at 1260 mm/min tool feed-speed.
in the explained measuring method, human error in selecting the points (dark and light boundaries) is very effective; the calculated percentage value may be affected. To have more secure results, an alternative measuring method was also used as follows.
The coordinate measuring machine (CMM) used in this study (Bridge Type; Leader Metrology Company, China, 2009) 18 has Renishaw PH10T head and Renishaw TP20 probe with 2 mm diameter stylus (Figure 9(c)). The ruby tip of stylus makes contact with the inner surface of the samples prepared from the tube, and by selecting four sample points around the formed circle, the circle diameter was determined. Measurements were performed three times in five sections, and the results given in Table 3 are the average of 15 repetitions with ㊣0.2% of coefficient of variation. The measurement results of this method are also shown in Table 3. It is obvious that there is no significant effect from ultrasonic vibration on the spring back of the tube.
Effect of axial ultrasonic vibration given to the workpiece on the inner surface quality of the formed tube
In order to investigate the effect of ultrasonic vibration on the inner surface quality of the formed zone, two sections of a tube in which ultrasonic vibration was applied for only the second half of its length were cut: one section at the middle of the place without application of ultrasonic and one section at the middle of the place formed under ultrasonic vibration. The pieces separated from the tube were halved along the axis in order to be able to see the deformed bore surface of the tube. Before viewing, the pieces were washed and dried. Figure 10 shows the surface quality of the two sections by using the optical measuring device (VMM). This figure reveals that the presence of ultrasonic vibration improves inner surface quality of the formed tube. In fact, creating a homogeneous surface pattern is one of the advantages of ultrasonic vibration. Although the surface of the tool was fully polished to mirror finish, traces of scratches are evident in Figure 10(a) in the form of vertical lines. Ultrasonic vibration significantly reduces these traces.
Results and discussion
Based on the findings of Figure 4, vibration amplitude and the ratio of tool feed-speed to amplitude of vibration speed have a significant influence on mechanism of process and on the forming force. Theoretical study shows that increase of the latter cause decrease of ultrasonic effect and thereby increasing forming forces. At unity, the effect of ultrasonic vibration is completely eliminated and the forming force will be equal to operation without ultrasonic.
Experimental results with and without axial longitudinal ultrasonic vibration of the tube and theoretical results of applying axial longitudinal ultrasonic vibration to the tool in various amplitudes of vibration (0, 5, 10, 27.8, 40 and 60??m) have been shown in Figure 11. According to the theoretical relations, in the vibro-impact regime, the axial forming force reduction is approximately 50% (5602 N in the presence of ultrasonic vibration of 60??m amplitude). In continuous regime of 10??m amplitude, the theoretical reduction is about 18% (9589?N). In experimental tests, maximum axial forming force reduction is about 21% (9249?N) when ultrasonic vibration of 1705?W power at frequency of 24,748?Hz and tool feed-speed of 840?mm/min is used. Therefore, comparing the experimental and theoretical results, it shows that the loading regime is continuous in experimental tests, that is, during the ultrasonic vibration, tool and tube are in continuous contact in the whole vibration period and no separation occurs.
It should be mentioned that during experimental tests, the longitudinal vibration has been applied to the workpiece, and the tool was forced to go ahead by a separated rod (no pulling was possible by the rod). In practice, due to limitations of tool feed-speed in the present experimental equipment, it was not possible to investigate the effect of the speed ratio (tool feed-speed over vibration speed amplitude) on the forming force. The amount of experimental axial forming force reduction in the presence of ultrasonic vibration was determined about 2每3?kN (15%每21%). It is expected that there was no separation between the tool and the workpiece and forming was of continuous type, these effects can be attributed to two dominant phenomena.
Nature of indentation forming process when the workpiece tube is longitudinally vibrated
In present experimental studies, feed force was transferred to the tool by a disconnected feeding rod pushing the tool only in one direction (ahead) inside the workpiece tube along the whole length of the tube.
By considering v<a肋 in our experimental condition, two forming situations could exist. The first, if the workpiece spring back was higher than twice the amplitude of vibration (2a<Ft/k0) , then the contact and the pressure force in the forging zone between the tool and the workpiece would not be interrupted and thereby the contact between the feed-rod and the tool was not interrupted either, whether the vibration given to the tool or given to the workpiece. In this case, only a little back move from the tool happens in response to elastic spring back of the workpiece.
The second, if the workpiece spring back was lower than twice the amplitude of longitudinal vibration given to the workpiece (2a>Ft/k0) , then although the tool was not separated from the workpiece (because of the lack of solid permanent connection of the tool and feed-rod), the rod could probably be separated from the tool in a half of a period and the rod tip could hammer and strike on the back of the tool in every vibration period.
It must be noted again that in our real case, the longitudinal vibration was given to the workpiece and the tool was driven forward by a disconnected rod, which was touching the back of the tool and pushing the tool ahead. Under this condition, even at low spring backs of the workpiece, the tool does not separate from the workpiece under any circumstances, but the hammering effect of the feeding rod still can occur if the condition of (2a>Ft/k0) is reached.
In our experiments, comparison of theoretical and experimental results (Figures 4 and 7) shows that the condition of 2a<Ft/k0 exists and no separation between the tool and the workpiece tube and the tool and the pushing rod occurs.
Effects of frictional forces, acoustic softening, local temperature rise at discontinuities and material structural changes
Unfortunately, the force monitoring system (Kistler, Type 9255B) has a maximum response speed of 1?kHz, and it is not able to show the force variation within a cycle as the variation frequency is much higher (about 25?kHz). Therefore, it has an averaging effect on the force. Otherwise, the said mechanisms in part 1 could be analyzed experimentally.
Conclusion
In this article, theory of ultrasonic-assisted indentation forming process (axial longitudinal vibration given to the tool) has been studied, and the corresponding analytical relations have been derived. In addition, for comparison purposes, experimental tests have been performed under axial longitudinal ultrasonic vibration given to the workpiece. According to the theoretical and experimental findings, the following conclusions can be made.
