The paper presents an investigation of flow and noise produced by the generic fan of an environmental control system installed in a circular duct, with a focus on the evaluation of the effect of mean flow distortions and elevated turbulence levels upstream of the fan, which are here created by replacing a baseline smooth bell-mouth duct inlet by inlets with a rectangular-to-circular transition of the duct cross section and with a T junction formed by two circular pipes. The study includes both experiments, which are aimed primarily at supplying data for a validation of simulation approaches and numerical simulations based on a hybrid Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes/large-eddy simulation approach. An acoustic modal decomposition of the measured and computed unsteady pressure fields is then carried out, which allows extracting “pure” (with filtered out hydrodynamic/turbulent fluctuations) acoustic modes propagating upstream and downstream under reflection-free conditions. A comparison with the experiment is performed for both the “raw” pressure spectra on the duct walls and the extracted individual acoustic modes. It is shown that, in terms of acoustics, a replacement of the clean inlet by the rectangular/circular one is almost neutral, whereas the T-junction inlet causes a strong noise penalty.
Noise produced by the environmental control system (ECS) constitutes a significant part of the overall noise inside an airplane cabin, and so it has a substantial impact on the passengers and crew comfort. Reliable prediction of this noise and revealing its main sources and mechanisms are essential for designing better noise-mitigating ECSs. Of significant interest in this respect are various installation and interaction effects: particularly, the effect of elevated level of turbulent fluctuations caused by nonuniformities of the flow in the ECS ducts on the noise generated by a blower (fan) ingesting such flow distortions. This effect is investigated exactly in the present study, which was carried out in the framework of the European-Union-funded project titled “Integrated Design of Optimal Ventilation Systems for Low Cabin and Ramp Noise” (or IDEALVENT).
The alteration of the noise produced by a rotating machine when it is subjected to different time-averaged and fluctuating inflow properties is well known. Helicopter noise research groups in the 1970s already considered the ingestion of atmospheric turbulence by the rotor and the resulting acoustic emissions [1]. The essential inflow distortion mechanism here, which is also encountered for aeroengines tested on static stands, is the intense longitudinal stretching of the turbulent structures sucked into the rotor that is induced by the contraction of the streamlines [2]. In many other applications reported in the literature, the inflow distortion is induced by local installation effects, e.g., in the presence of a hull with control surfaces for an underwater propulsor [3] or upstream obstructions in ducted axial subsonic fans [4–7]. In those cases, the time-averaged radial and azimuthal nonuniformity of the inflow is a key element affecting tonal noise generation. In [5], obstructions of different sizes and shapes were placed in front of the inlet of a ducted fan in an anechoic chamber. The fan was placed at the duct entrance, permitting free-field acoustic measurements. Conceptually similar free-field investigations were presented in [6] using cylindrical rod obstructions and in [8] for a free propeller placed in the core of a jet stream passing through a modal distortion generator.
A distinctive feature of the present work, with respect to the aforementioned investigations, is the inclusion of the duct response as part of the installation effect by means of in-duct microphone measurements. The coupling between the Fourier–Bessel modal decomposition of the source excitation and the duct response was studied in [9], which established the so-called Tyler and Sofrin rule for noise control, exploiting the duct cutoff properties through suitably chosen blade/vane counts. This is, however, hardly applicable in the case of a generally uncontrolled inflow distortion, which may contain complex and/or unknown Fourier–Bessel modal content and thereby defeat a strategy aimed at decoupling the source from the duct response [5]. Yet, the modal decomposition of the in-duct microphone measurements remains quite useful to extract the component of the pressure field corresponding to acoustic waves propagating away from the source, from the fluctuations associated with the boundary layer turbulence, or from acoustic reflections at the duct terminations [10,11]. The last point is actually essential to perform an unambiguous analysis of installation effects caused by different duct inlet geometries as described in the following because different inlets are associated to different inflow qualities and different acoustic reflection properties simultaneously.
A specific fan considered in the study is a generic ECS blower installed in a circular duct and having a rotor with 15 blades and a stator with 10 vanes (see Fig. 1). The duct inner diameter D is equal to 0.15 m; the rotation speed is around 11,200 rpm; and the bulk flow velocity is approximately 32 m∕s, resulting in a Reynolds number of the flow close to that in practical applications. To analyze the effect of the flow distortions upstream of the fan, three different cases are considered. In the first (baseline) case, the duct has a smooth bell-mouth inlet, resulting in a “clean” flow upstream of the fan with turbulence confined within a thin boundary layer on the duct wall. Note that, even using a well-designed inlet bell mouth, it is rather difficult to completely eliminate residual large-scale motions in the room where the inlet is located, which by acceleration and turbulence stretching can still induce significant tonal noise [12,13]. In the other two cases, a significant nonuniformity of the flow and elevated levels of turbulent fluctuations in the upstream part of the duct away from its walls are created by replacing the bell-mouth inlet by inlets with a rectangular-to-circular transition of the duct cross section and with a T junction formed by two circular inlet pipes (see Fig. 2). In this work, it is assumed that a reasonably designed ECS will guarantee that the blower will operate around its maximum efficiency point, even for complex geometrical layouts. For this reason, some care is applied to not significantly change the operating point of the fan, unlike in other studies, as described in [4], where some distortions induced sufficient blockage to lead to nearly choked conditions.
The study includes both a set of experiments aimed primarily at supplying data for validation of different simulation approaches and numerical investigations based on a hybrid Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS)/large-eddy simulation (LES) approach. This approach offers a computationally affordable scale-resolving simulation strategy with a low level of empiricism potentially capable of an accurate prediction of both tonal and broadband components of the noise generated by ducted fans at practical (rather high) Reynolds numbers. An alternative numerical technique, having received an increasing interest over the past decade, is based on the lattice- Boltzmann approach, and it was recently applied to fairly complex installed configurations such as a low-speed axial fan [14], an automotive cooling module [15], or a centrifugal ventilation system [16], albeit at considerably smaller Reynolds and tip Mach numbers than in the present study.
Amajor goal of this work is to check whether the developed numerical system really possesses the capability to simulate geometrically complex systems, with particularly small rotor–stator axial separation, as can be seen in Fig. 1, including capturing the relatively subtle effect of the fan noise alteration caused by the inlet distortions.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II contains an overview of experiments carried out at the von Kármán Institute for Fluid Dynamics. Then, Sec. III presents a description of the developed simulation approach, the numerical system employed in the calculations, and the computational setup. Section IV discusses results of the simulations and their comparison with available experimental data. Finally, some conclusions are formulated in Sec. V.
Considering that the present paper is mainly concerned with the simulation aspects of the ducted-fan flows, the characterization of the experimental part of the study will only be a brief overview.
The experimental rig for the various ducted-fan test cases is installed in the anechoic room of the von Kármán Institute for Fluid Dynamics. The duct is composed of modules corresponding to a fan or/and various flow obstructions and instrumented sections (static pressure probes, a radial and azimuthal hot-wire traversing system, microphone multiports, and loudspeaker arrays; see Figs. 2 and 3). The modules are made of acrylic glass. As described in the Introduction (Sec. I), to create flow distortions upstream of the fan, the bell-mouth inlet module shown in Fig. 3 is replaced by inlet modules with a rectangular-to-circular transition and a T junction, presented in Fig. 4. Both inlet geometries result in azimuthal inhomogeneity of the mean flow and the turbulence intensity being ingested by the fan, causing an extraneous tonal and broadband noise generation.
The aerodynamic measurements carried out for the three considered ducted-fan flows include the pressure rise across the fan module using two sets of four cross-connected pressure taps, and hot-wire measurements of the maps of the mean streamwise velocity and its root-mean-square fluctuations in several duct cross sections upstream of the fan. The in-duct pressure fluctuations are measured with two flush-mounted microphone arrays: one upstream and one downstream of the fan module.
For the hot-wire measurements, a single probe was used with a motorized radial–azimuthal probe traversing system designed to map the fan inflow over the entire cross section of the duct and quantify the effect of the different inflow modules. A map of the scanning grid is shown in Fig. 5, illustrating that the measurements were concentrated close to the duct wall, down to a minimum wall distance of about 0.002 m, with a total of 385 measurement locations over a crossplane. At the smaller distances to the wall, the velocity needed there for computing the mass flow rate was obtained by interpolation, assuming zero value at the duct wall. The hot-wire anemometer signal was low-pass filtered at 22,500 kHz and acquired at a frequency of 65,536 Hz. At each point of the map, data were acquired for a duration of 15 s, generating around one million time samples, which are considered largely sufficient to obtain mean flow and turbulence intensity with uncertainties well below the intrinsic measurement accuracy.
The simulated operating points of the fan with the three different inlets are superimposed with the experimental performance curve in Fig. 6, demonstrating a good agreement. Furthermore, the figure shows that the fan is operating in a realistic and stable regime, far enough from stall. Also important, it is verified from the simulations that the operating point is not significantly affected by the upstream distortions. This permits relating the extraneous noise generation to the inflow quality, and not to an increase of the steady load exerted on the blades.
Due to the fact that the microphone arrays and loudspeaker modules must be located between the blower unit and the inflow module in order to extract the modal content of the acoustic source, the minimum distance between the blower inlet and the inlet module has to be larger than four duct diameters. As a result, the degree of mean flow inhomogeneity that is ingested by the fan is noticeably attenuated with respect to what the same inlet geometry would generate for a shorter duct. This is illustrated by Fig. 7 which shows cross planes just downstream of the inlet geometry (top row) and just upstream of the fan inlet, approximately four duct diameters downstream of the duct inlet (bottom row) for bell-mouth inlet (first column), rectangular-to-circular inlet (middle column), and T-junction inlet (last column).
Regarding the in-duct acoustic measurements themselves, an elaborated system involving multiple-microphone and multiple- loudspeaker arrays was developed with the aim of extracting the noise produced by the fan, irrespective of the changing acoustic reflecting conditions induced by the different inlet geometries, as the objective of this study is indeed to investigate the inlet aerodynamic installation effect, and not the acoustic one. The approach was based on a modal decomposition of the acoustic field measured at a number of wall-mounted microphone locations, as well as on the prior measurement of the modal reflection matrices of the duct terminations and of the modal scattering matrix of the fan itself. This permitted extraction of the noise that would be radiated by the fan placed in an anechoic duct (the so-called active or source component of the acoustic field), and it compared the measured and simulated fan noise without ambiguity (in the present work, this is done only for the case of the bell-mouth inlet; see Sec. IV.C). More details about the modal extraction, which was based on an extension of a general linear multiport approach [10–11], were provided in [17–20].
In general, the approach developed for the solution of the considered problem consisted of direct computation of the noise produced by the fan based on a compressible scale-resolving simulation of turbulence with the use of a hybrid RANS-LES method of the detached-eddy simulation type, namely, the improved delayed detached-eddy simulation (IDDES;[21]). This method is currently well established for unsteady simulations in both aerodynamic and aeroacoustic applications, including engine and airframe noise (see, e.g., [22–30]).
In the presence of “inflow” turbulent content, IDDES performs as a wall-modeled LES (WMLES). To “inject” such turbulent content, specially designed distributed volumetric source terms are introduced into the momentum and turbulent kinetic energy transport equations within a confined region located upstream of the fan. This approach, called the volume synthetic turbulence generator (VSTG) is based on the earlier proposed efficient “surface” synthetic turbulence generator (STG) [25]. Its formulation and some results of validation can be found in [31]. Thus, within the developed computational procedure, the IDDES is used as a zonal method that functions in the RANS mode upstream of the VSTG area and in the WMLES mode downstream of this area. Similar to the STG [25], the VSTG parameters are set based on the RANS solution in the corresponding duct section and ensure that the “created” turbulence matches the RANS Reynolds stresses right downstream of the VSTG region. A major advantage of the VSTG over the STG [25] and other surface generators of synthetic turbulence is that, with a sufficiently stretched source region, it does not create any noticeable spurious noise, which is of primary importance for aeroacoustic problems.
Note that the IDDES version used in the present study employs the shear-stress transport with curvature correction (SST-CC) model of Smirnov and Menter [32] as a background RANS turbulence model. This model presents an adaptation of the curvature–rotation correction suggested in [33,34] for the one-equation Spalart–Allmaras model [35] to the two-equation k-ω SST model [36]. This model was chosen because unlike the model [33] it provides a modeled turbulent kinetic energy which is an input parameter of the VSTG technique.
In principle, the outlined approach is capable of predicting both the tonal and the broadband components of the noise produced by the fan and its propagation over the ventilation duct and into the surrounding ambient air. However, such computations would require nonaffordably large computational resources. For this reason, in the present work, the subdomain in which the turbulence-resolving (IDDES) computations are performed is limited to a relatively small part of the duct neighboring the fan module.
As a result, the whole computational procedure, in addition to the main (“production”) IDDES computation in such a truncated domain, involves two auxiliary precursor stages necessary for setting inflow and outflow boundary conditions for the production simulation. Specifically, the inflow profiles used in the IDDES stage of the computations are obtained from the steady RANS computation of the duct inlet flow. The information needed for imposing the outflow boundary conditions is obtained from a precursor unsteady RANS (URANS) computation of the fan flow (a more detailed description of the boundary conditions is presented in the next section).
Another consequence of carrying out scale-resolving simulations in the limited computational domain is that the extraction of the acoustic signal from such simulations is far from trivial. Indeed, in the vicinity of the noise-generating region (at least downstream of it), the acoustic signal is strongly covered with pressure fluctuations caused by turbulence and, in particular, by impingement of turbulent structures on the duct walls. Furthermore, despite employing “nonreflecting” boundary conditions at the inlet and outlet of the IDDES computational domain, some inlet and outlet reflections of the sound waves are still possible. So, in order to extract acoustic signals that are free of reflections and hydrodynamic fluctuations, specialized supplementary acoustic techniques should be used. In the present work, for this purpose, a methodology for acoustic mode extraction based on a linear multiport model [10,11,17–20] is adapted.
As mentioned, the extraction of the acoustic signal from the experimental data faces similar difficulties because the in-duct microphones also cannot distinguish between the acoustic and hydrodynamic/turbulent fluctuations of the wall pressure. In addition, as will be shown in the following, in the experiment the in-duct acoustic field is contaminated by reflections of sound waves by the duct terminations much more significantly than in the simulations. Therefore, postprocessing of both the measured and the computed pressure fluctuations with the use of the modal decomposition technique [10,11,17–20] is needed to ensure a consistent comparison of the predicted acoustic characteristics with the experiment.
The locations of the inflow and outflow boundaries of the computational domains and boundary conditions used in the three stages of the fan flow computations outlined previously are presented in Fig. 8.
A precursor steady RANS is performed in the computational domains, which include the inlet modules and an adjacent part of the ventilation duct of the length of 5D. At the RANS inflow boundary, the total pressure and the temperature are prescribed. At the outflow, the static pressure is assumed to be a constant adjusted in the course of the computations to match the experimental mass flow rate (MFR) through the duct equal to 0.636 kg∕s for all three considered cases (this corresponds to the bulk flow velocity around 32 m∕s). The computational domains used in the precursor URANS stage and in the main (production) IDDES stage are identical and include the fan module and the upstream and downstream parts of the duct of the lengths of 3D and 6D, respectively. The inflow/outflow boundary conditions used in these stages are as follows.
The inflow profiles are prescribed based on the known solution of the precursor steady RANS in the corresponding duct section. To prevent reflections of the sound waves from the URANS/IDDES inlet, the imposed boundary conditions are of a characteristic type. Namely, they prescribe the profiles of the incoming one-dimensional (1-D) Riemann invariants, whereas the outgoing invariant at the boundary is computed by extrapolation from the interior of the computational domain.
At the outflow boundary, in the precursor URANS stage, the value of the static pressure pout is tuned to ensure the given MFR. All the other flow quantities at this boundary are obtained by extrapolation from the interior of the domain. Then, in the final IDDES stage of the computations, a mitigation of reflections from the outflow boundary of the domain is ensured by using a “sponge” (“absorbing”) layer technique [37]. The width of the outflow sponge layer shown in Fig. 8 is around 3D,and a “target” solution within this layer is defined as the time average of a precursor URANS solution. The animations of unsteady pressure fields from the simulations suggest that these inflow/outflow boundary conditions prevent any noticeable reflections of sound waves from the boundaries. Yet, postprocessing of the results with the use of the modal decomposition technique [17–20] (see Sec. IV.C) reveals that, in fact, at few frequencies, these reflections are far from negligible.
Note, finally, that both the URANS and the IDDES computations are performed in the full azimuthal domain (360 deg) with the use of a rotating “rotor” grid block and sliding interfaces between the rotating and stationary grid blocks (see the following). Therefore, they do not rely on any assumption of the azimuthal periodicity of the flow, which is widely used in the fan flow modeling but is not justified in the considered cases of the “distorted” duct inlets.
To facilitate the generation of the grid for the IDDES and reduce its size, the real geometry of the fan shown in Fig. 1 was simplified based on a set of preliminary RANS computations carried out in the framework of the IDEALVENT project by A. Wohlbrandt of DLR, German Aerospace Center.§§ The simplifications are as follows:
1）Some geometrical details (such as screws, supply lines, etc.) were ignored. 
2）Cavities present at the front and back of the fan hub were replaced by solid walls. 
3）Small “steps” on the fan casing wall were smoothed.
4）The rotor tip clearance ( 1% of the rotor blades span) and fillets on both the rotor and the stator blades were ignored.
According to RANS, these simplifications do not significantly change the aerodynamic characteristics of the considered flow and, in particular, the pressure rise over the fan module; although, as will be discussed in Sec. IV, their effect on the acoustic characteristics may be substantial. Furthermore, the computational setup did not include a rectangular cavity on the casing wall downstream of the fan (see the far- right frame in Fig. 1). In principle, this cavity may cause acoustic scattering, resulting in a redistribution of the modal content of the acoustic waves. A quantitative evaluation of this effect, as well as of the effect of ignoring the tip clearance on the acoustics, is planned for future work.
The fan flow computations were carried out with the use of a general purpose in-house NTS code [38] capable of the simulation of turbulence in the framework of a full range of turbulence-resolving approaches. This was a structured finite volume high-order computational fluid dynamics code accepting multiblock overlapping grids of the Chimera type. The code has been intensively used for a wide range of aerodynamic and aeroacoustic problems, and it was shown to be reliable and accurate. It was adapted to the computation of the flows with rotating elements with the use of the approach based on employing different reference frames in different grid blocks combined with the sliding interfaces technique for imposing the boundary conditions at the interfaces between rotating and stationary grid blocks (see [39] for more details). A compressible branch of the code used in the present study was based on an implicit Roe-type flux-difference-splitting numerical scheme. In the URANS computations, the inviscid fluxes were approximated with fifth-order upwind-biased differences, except for the rotating grid blocks adjacent to the rotor blades (see below), where switching to the third-order upwind-biased differences turned out to be necessary in order to ensure stability of the simulations in the presence of very large gradients of velocity near the stationary casing wall. In the IDDES computations, in the major part of the computational domain, the approximation of inviscid fluxes was performed with the use of the low-dissipation weighted fourth-order centered/fifth-order upwind-biased scheme, with a fixed weight of the upwind differences equal to 0.1. The exceptions were, again, the grid blocks adjacent to the rotor blades, as well as the VSTG region. Within the former, as in the URANS, the third-order upwind-biased scheme was used. Within the latter, the weight of the upwind differences was set zero in order to ensure a rapid development of resolved turbulent structures.
The viscous fluxes in all the simulations were approximated with the use of a second-order centered scheme.
Finally, the time integration was based on the dual time stepping (with subiterations in pseudotime) and the backward second- order approximation of the time derivatives (three-layer scheme). The simulations were carried out with fixed number of subiterations per time step; Niter 10. This ensured a decrease of the maximum residuals of the governing equations by at least two orders of magnitude.
The grid used in the URANS and IDDES stages of the computations consisted of 34 overlapping blocks. Its structure and topology are illustrated by Figs. 9 and 10, in which the parts of the grid that belong to the rotating blocks treated in the noninertial (rotating) reference frame are shown in red.
The grid upstream and downstream of the hub is axisymmetric, with a Cartesian grid block inserted near the axis of the duct in order to avoid numerical difficulties caused by singularity near the axis arising in computations of three-dimensional (3-D) flows in the cylindrical coordinates. These axisymmetric blocks have Nϕ 124 uniform cells in the azimuthal direction and Nr 90 cells in the radial direction with clustering near the duct wall. The azimuthal grid in the axisymmetric grid blocks over the rotor and stator of the fan is refined by a factor of 3 relative the duct grid and has Nϕ 360 cells, with “intermediate” neighboring blocks with Nϕ 240 (shown in blue in Fig. 9) inserted in order to avoid too-strong abrupt changes of the azimuthal resolution between the rotor/stator and the duct grids. Around the rotor and stator blades, O-type grid blocks are built, which have, respectively, 100 and 150 cells in the circumferential direction (i.e., along the surface of the blades), with grid clustering in the vicinity of the leading and trailing edges of the blades. The radial grid in the passage between the fan hub and casing has Nr 60 cells and is clustered toward both walls. A total number of cells in the streamwise direction Nx is around 750, resulting in about 20 million cells total.
The streamwise grid is refined in the region starting from 2D (0.3 m) upstream and ending by 2.5D (0.38 m) downstream of the fan module, with additional clustering near the forward and rear edges of the hub and in the fan passage. The maximum grid step in this area is Δx m, and then is gradually increased, reaching the value of Δx m. With the high-order numerical scheme, this guaranties an accurate resolution of sound waves propagating along the duct up to a frequency of 6000 Hz (at this frequency, around 10 grid cells are used per the wavelength of the upstream propagating waves).
Finally, the time step was set as Δt s, which resulted in Courant–Friedrich–Lewy values based on the sound velocity of around 1.0 in the fine-grid part of the computational domain. This value of Δt was equal to around 1∕70th of the period corresponding to the rotor blade passing frequency (BPF) of fBPF ≈ 2800 Hz, thus ensuring a sufficiently accurate representation of the flow unsteadiness caused by rotation.
A time sample in the production IDDESs that were started from the flowfields obtained in the precursor URANS was around 35 convective time units; D∕U0. It included a transient period of ≈20 convective units to reach a statistically mature state of the flow and a period of ≈15 convective time units (≈14 full rotor revolutions) used for accumulation of turbulence statistics and instantaneous wall pressure for the computation of the pressure spectra.
Sample visualizations from the IDDES of this flow are presented in Fig. 11 in the form of instantaneous fields of vorticity magnitude and streamwise velocity in the meridian plane of the duct combined with the fields on axisymmetric grid surfaces inside the passage between the hub and the fan casing. In this figure, results are shown for three such surfaces, with the radius in the cylindrical part of the passage rsurf = 0.06 m (close to the hub; first row), rsurf = 0.07 m (middle of the passage; second row), and rsurf = 0.08 m (close to the casing wall; third row). Other than that, Figs. 12 and 13 present a 3-D view of the instantaneous vorticity and two 3-D views of the instantaneous isosurfaces of the swirl (magnitude of the second eigenvalue of the velocity gradient tensor) “colored” by the value of the streamwise velocity. In addition, in order to give an idea about the difference in the flow representation in the framework of scale- resolving simulations and RANS, Figs. 14 and 15 show sample comparisons of instantaneous fields obtained in the IDDES and in the URANS.
These figures provide a visual representation of turbulence resolved in the simulations. In particular, they show a drastic difference of the scale of the vortical structures present in the IDDES and URANS solutions. Naturally, the URANS is capable of resolving only the large-scale vortices originating from the turbulent wakes of the rotor blades and stator vanes (even these large-scale vortices in the URANS solution rapidly dissipate behind the hub base because of the very large turbulent viscosity predicted by the SST-CC turbulence model in this region; see Fig. 14). The IDDES reveals much “richer” vortical activity. The small-scale vortices in the IDDES are formed in the intervane stator area due to disintegration of the rotor blade wakes, in the stator vane wakes, and in the separation regions behind the hub base and on the suction side of the stator vanes (a shape of the latter separation region is shown in Fig. 16, which presents the time- averaged surface streamlines: “oil flow” visualization). As far as the quality of turbulence resolution reached in the LES regions of the IDDES is concerned, it can be assessed based on Fig. 17 presenting the fields of resolved and time-averaged modeled turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) from the simulations. As seen in the figure, the resolved energy amounts to 80–90% of the total TKE, which shows the quite acceptable accuracy of the simulation with the grid and numerics used.
Note that the flow over the rotor blades remains attached, except for a thin separation near the hub surface, which is probably induced by the separation (also thin) from the forward edge of the hub (the latter may well be caused by the simplification of the hub geometry in the computational model). As a result, despite the presence of the resolved turbulent content in the incoming duct wall boundary layer, with the current grid, the boundary layers forming on the rotor blades are treated effectively in the RANS mode of the IDDES. This does not allow capturing the noise originating from interaction of the fine-scale vortical structures populating these boundary layers with the leading edge of the stator blades, which could be achieved only on the basis of full LES with transition prediction. However, considering that the boundary layer on the rotor blades is very thin, this would require unaffordable computational grids. Nonetheless, despite this evident limitation of the current simulations, quite an acceptable agreement of the broadband component of the predicted and measured wall-pressure spectra in a wide range of frequencies is achieved (see Sec. IV.B). This provides indirect evidence that the simulations do capture a major part of turbulence activity within the noise-generating area. This is partly explained by some peculiarities of the considered typical ECS fan: particularly, the very small rotor/stator separation distance and the presence of multiple separation regions. An application of the approach used in the present study to other designs, for example, to a fan stage of modern turbofan engines [40] might be not that successful, at least on grids of similar density. Figure 18 illustrates a structure of the time-averaged field of the streamwise velocity predicted by the IDDES (the same three axisymmetric surfaces as in Fig. 11 are shown). It reveals the separation region near the suction side of the stator vanes, for which the length decreases while moving along the vane from the fan hub to its casing. This is consistent with the stator oil flow visualization presented in Fig. 16.
Finally, Fig. 19a gives an idea about the unsteady pressure field predicted by the IDDES inside the duct with an installed fan. The complexity of this field originates from a multimodal content of both the tonal and broadband components of the noise generated by the fan and propagating along the duct. In addition, the instantaneous pressure field is strongly affected by the pressure fluctuations caused by an impingement of turbulent vortical structures on the wall. The latter effect explains why the noise signature is seen much more clearly upstream of the fan where it is not contaminated by turbulent fluctuations. As for the wall-pressure field predicted by the URANS (see Fig. 19b), it completely misses the broadband noise component and has a regular pattern that is typical of the tonal noise.
This effect is illustrated by Figs. 20–23.
Particularly, Fig. 20 presents snapshots of the vorticity magnitude and the streamwise and radial velocities in the duct cross section upstream of the fan (recall that these fields are created by the VSTG based on corresponding RANS solutions slightly upstream of the VSTG region). The figure reveals a significant difference in turbulence impinging on the front surface of the hub and on the rotor blades for the three considered inlets. In the case of the clean (bell-mouth) inlet, only fine-grained turbulent structures confined within a narrow boundary layer on the duct wall are observed. With the T-junction inlet, the presence of large-scale turbulent structures upstream of the fan is evident, and the turbulence “covers” the whole duct cross section. For the inlet formed by the rectangular-to-circular transition, an intermediate situation takes place.
However, as seen from Fig. 21, this difference in the upstream turbulence does not cause any visible alteration of the large-scale or fine- grained turbulence within the fan passage and behind the hub base. This can be explained by a generation of intense vortical structures inside the fan and in the shear layers separated from the trailing edge of the hub. The effect of the shape of the duct inlet on the instantaneous and time-averaged velocity fields (not shown) turns out to be rather weak as well.
The turbulent statistics are more sensitive to the presence of the inlet disturbances. This is seen, for example, in Fig. 22, showing the predicted fields of the resolved TKE in the meridian section of the duct and on a surface of revolution located inside the fan passage; as well as in Fig. 23, presenting distributions of the root mean square of the pressure fluctuations over the fan surface. For the two disturbed inlets, the flow distortions result in increased levels of both TKE in the core of the flow upstream of the fan and the wall-pressure fluctuations on the “front face” of the hub and on the leading edge of the rotor blades. The effect is much stronger in the case of the T-junction inlet.
This, in turn, results in a noticeable alteration of the acoustic pressure field inside the duct, which is illustrated by Fig. 24. Particularly, the figure and (more visibly) corresponding animations of the wall-pressure reveal a noticeable increase of the amplitude of the acoustic waves propagating in the upstream direction in the ducts with the distorted inlets, which is consistent with the higher level of the root mean square of the pressure fluctuations on the fan surface. Again, the effect is more pronounced for the duct with the T-junction inlet.
A direct comparison of the raw wall-pressure spectra obtained in the IDDES of the three considered flows and in the experiment for the microphones located both upstream and downstream of the fan module is shown in Figs. 25 and 26, which present the major outcome of the current work. Note that in these figures, for the upstream microphone (mic.), predicted spectra are corrected with the use of empirical correlation (corr.) of Goody [41] to account for contribution of turbulence of attached boundary layer on the duct wall.
As far as the tonal noise is concerned, an analysis of these spectra reveals the striking difference between the predicted and measured amplitude of the first blade passing frequency order harmonic (f = 2800 Hz). Indeed, in the experiment, a strong tone at this frequency is observed; whereas in the simulations, this tone is almost completely cut off. Note, however, that for the considered ducted fan, the first BPF harmonic cutoff is exactly what has to take place (at least for the case of an axisymmetric bell-mouth inlet) according to the rule of Tyler and Sofrin [9]. So, the presence of this tone in the measured spectra is, most probably, explained by violation of the flow periodicity in the experiment, which may be caused by irregularities of the geometry ignored in the numerical problem setup (first of all, by the presence of the thick power supply cable and the rectangular cavity on the casing surface downstream of the fan).
Leaving aside this difference, the agreement of the simulation results with the data can be assessed as acceptable. Within the resolved frequency range, for all the three considered duct inlets, a significant discrepancy is observed only in the low-frequency end of the spectra of the upstream propagating noise (see Fig. 25). At least partly, this may be caused by stronger reflections of the low-frequency sound waves by the duct inlets in the experiment than in the simulations. Note also that the effect of the shape of the inlet (Fig. 26), which is of primary interest in the present study, is predicted more accurately than the absolute sound power.
Overall, the achieved agreement of the simulation results with the raw experimental spectra of the wall-pressure fluctuations in the considered ducted-fan flows supports credibility of the developed numerical tool. Still, as already mentioned, the comparison of the spectra presented previously cannot be considered as fully consistent because some reflections of the sound waves from the inlets and outlets of the ducts are present in both the experiment and the simulations. For the case of the bell-mouth inlet, a more consistent comparison is performed in the next section based on the linear multiport technique [17–20], which allows extracting the pure (with filtered out hydrodynamic/turbulent fluctuations) acoustic modes propagating upstream and downstream of the fan under reflection-free conditions.
The methodology [17–20] employs a projection of the sound field in the considered duct on a set of cut-on (propagating) acoustic modes that are the eigensolutions of the convective wave equation for the duct. The reflection and transmission of these modes are characterized by a scattering matrix of the test object (fan) and reflection matrices of the duct terminations in experiments or of the computational inlet/outlet boundaries in simulations. As applied to the experiment, the procedure includes two steps.
In the first step, in order to define the scattering and reflection matrices, a set of special experiments is carried out, which use sound fields produced by external sound sources uncorrelated to the sound field of the aeroacoustic source (a detailed description of this step can be found in [17]). Corresponding measurements for the fan with a bell-mouth inlet were performed in [17]. In the second step, the pure modal acoustic signal emitted by the fan is extracted based on the known scattering and reflection matrices and cross correlations of the pressure fluctuations at pairs of distant points sampled without external sources. Details of the postprocessing procedure were presented in [18–20].
As far as postprocessing of the simulation data is concerned, in principle, computing the scattering and reflection matrices could be performed with the use of effectively the same approach as in the experiment, i.e., by means of a set of simulations with known external acoustic sources (this methodology was described in [42]). However, in the present work, a simplified (and computationally much cheaper) approach is adapted. It employs the fact that, thanks to the nonreflecting boundary conditions, the computational inlet/outlet reflection coefficients are small in the whole range of frequencies, except for the lowest frequencies and the vicinity of the cut-on frequencies of the acoustic modes (see the following). This makes neglecting the actual scattering of the fan an acceptable approximation. Hence, both the inflow and outflow reflection coefficients and the amplitudes of the acoustic modes of the source can be extracted from the IDDES unsteady pressure fields with the use of postprocessing, which is basically the same as that used for the experiment [18]. The procedure, however, is adapted to much shorter time samples available in the IDDES as compared to the experiment (∼0.1 s of physical time in the IDDES versus 45 min in the measurements). Namely, in order to reduce the higher “noise” caused by a lower number of averages for computation of the cross spectra because of the short time samples, the procedure employs a much larger set of sampling points available in the simulations. In the postprocessing of the IDDES results, the spectra of the acoustic modes are computed by averaging 50 sets of the spectra obtained based on cross-spectral matrices of the size of 200 × 200; whereas in the experiments [17,19], only a matrix of the size of 16 × 16 is available.
Figure 27 presents the frequency dependencies of the inlet/outlet reflection coefficients for different acoustic modes propagating upstream and downstream of the fan in the duct with a clean bell-mouth inlet obtained based on the IDDES and the experiment. Results are shown for six modes with the lowest cut-on frequencies, namely, the plane wave [mode (0, 0)] propagating at all frequencies; four azimuthal modes (m, 0), with m 1; 2 with cut-on frequencies at 1330 Hz (m 1) and 2220 Hz (m 2); and the first radial mode (0, n), with n 1 (cut-on frequency at 2780 Hz, which is very close to the blade passing frequency of the considered fan). Dashed vertical lines in the figure correspond to these cut-on frequencies. Note that, for the two other inlets, the computational reflection coefficients (not shown) are very close to those for the bell-mouth inlet, whereas the advanced measurements allowing a modal decomposition were performed only for the bell-mouth inlet at frequencies between 500 and 3500 Hz.
The figure demonstrates that the computational reflection coefficient is small everywhere, except for a close neighborhood of cut-on frequencies of corresponding modes and the lowest frequency range (f < 350 Hz) for the outlet reflections. Note that the stronger reflection at the cut-on frequencies is most probably explained by changing the propagation angle: it is normal to the duct axis at cut on; for this reason, the 1-D nonreflective boundary conditions fail, as does the entire modal decomposition. Thus, in general, the results shown in Fig. 28 provide a posteriori justification of neglecting the scattering of the fan in the modal decomposition of the IDDES unsteady pressure field, except for the longest sound waves propagating downstream. For the latter, the reflections by the outflow sponge layer turn out to be very strong, which may result in an inaccuracy of the amplitudes of extracted downstream propagating plane waves (at low frequencies, all the other duct acoustic modes are cut off). Possible reason(s) for this deficiency of the simulations are yet to be understood. As for the sound wave reflections by the duct terminations in the experiment (both at the inlet and at the outlet), they are rather strong over the whole range of frequencies and for all the considered acoustic modes, which suggests that accounting for both the reflection and the scattering effects in the modal decomposition of the measured pressure signals is necessary.
Figure 28 compares the computed and measured amplitudes of the extracted acoustic modes for the bell-mouth inlet and illustrates the effect of the inlet shape on these amplitudes predicted by the IDDES. Major observations based on this figure are as follows.
First, the agreement of the predictions with the experiment for all the acoustic modes is consistent with the raw wall-pressure spectra discussed in Sec. IV.B above. Namely, similar to these spectra (Fig. 25), the major discrepancy of the simulation and experiment resides in the tonal noise of the fan corresponding to the first blade passing frequency order harmonic, which shows up in the experiment and is absent in the computed spectra. The computations also reproduce the spectral shapes and levels of the broadband part of the individual acoustic modes, which is encouraging when considering that these are rather subtle characteristics of the sound field of the source. Unfortunately, the lack of the experimental data at frequencies lower than 500 Hz does not allow suggesting any specific reasons of the discrepancy between the measured and computed raw pressure spectra of the upstream propagating noise observed in the low-frequency range (see Fig. 25).
As far as the effect of the inlet shape predicted by the IDDES is concerned, for the individual modes, it turns out to not be exactly the same as for the wall-pressure spectra (Fig. 26). In particular, for the individual modes, a replacement of the bell-mouth inlet by the T-junction inlet, in a wide frequency range, results in a significant (3–5 dB) increase of the noise propagating both upstream and downstream. In contrast to this, for the wall-pressure spectra, the effect for the downstream direction is almost unnoticeable, which is explained by “contamination” of the wall-pressure signal at the downstream microphone location by turbulent pressure fluctuations.
Finally, at low frequencies (f < 300 Hz), the noise penalty of the T-junction inlet for the upstream direction is very large ( 20 dB) for both the individual acoustic modes and the total wall pressure. For the rectangular/circular inlet, the noise penalty is marginal, except for the low- frequency noise propagating upstream, which is up to 10 dB stronger than in the system with the bell-mouth inlet.
A combined experimental/numerical study of the ducted-fan noise performed in the present work demonstrates the high potential of the hybrid RANS-LES scale resolving approaches to the turbulence representation as a tool for such noise prediction. Furthermore, it shows a high value of invoking a technique of modal decompositions coupled with the acoustic multiport approach. This technique is essential for extracting pure (with filtered out hydrodynamic/turbulent fluctuations) acoustic modes propagating under anechoic conditions, thus facilitating an adequate comparison of predictions and measurements.
It is found out that the effect of the inlet distortions caused by the use of the rectangular/circular transition as an inlet instead of the clean bell-mouth inlet results in a marginal alteration of the fan noise, except for the low-frequency noise propagating in the upstream direction, which increases by up to 10 dB. A noise penalty caused by replacement of the bell-mouth inlet by the inlet with the T junction formed by two circular pipes turns out to be much more severe. It ranges between 3 and 5 dB in a wide frequency range for both upstream and downstream propagating noise, and it reaches about 20 dB at the low-frequency end of the spectra.
In terms of numerical modeling approaches, further work should be directed, first of all, at a substantial mitigation of reflections of the long (comparable with the domain size) waves from the outlet of the computational domain observed in the present simulations. On the experimental side, definition of the scattering and reflection matrices in a frequency range considerably extended toward low frequencies and conducting experiments with different types of inlets are desirable.
We thank also A. Wohlbrandt (DLR, German Aerospace Center) who provided a cleaned up CAD model of the fan and performed a series of preliminary steady Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes computations justifying the geometry simplifications used in the present study.

A wall-modeled statistically converged Large Eddy Simulation (LES) of the turbulent ﬂow in the NASA Source Diagnostic Test turbofan has been successfully performed for the ﬁrst time. A good agreement with aerodynamic measurements is observed for both Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes and LES results, although the LES provides better results in the tip regions where large coherent structures appear and no ﬂow separation on the stator vanes is observed. In the LES the boundary layer naturally transition to turbulence on the blade suc-tion side but remains quasi laminar over most of its pressure side. The rotor-wake turbulence yielding the stage broadband noise is then seen to be quasi isotropic. Transition on the down-stream stator vanes is not triggered by the wake impingement but rather occurs at mid-chord. Finally, acoustics are investigated using both Ffowcs Williams & Hawkings’ and Goldstein’s analogies from the recorded LES noise source on the stator vanes. The latter analogy provides levels closer to the measurements especially at high frequencies, although the results are most likely still inﬂuenced by too coherent rotor tip secondary ﬂow at low frequencies.
Turbofan architecture has evolved toward an increasing contribution of the fan to the thrust. At approach conditions, the fan noise has become one of the main contributors with a main broadband content mostly in the forward arc of the engine [1–3]. The noise generated by the fan will increase even more for future turbo-engines that will involve Ultra-High By-pass Ratio (UHBR) turbofans. For these architectures, fan noise is projected to become the dominant source overall. In a classical turbofan as the present conﬁguration, the interaction between the wake of the rotor and equally-distributed Outlet-Guide Vanes (OGV) has been found to be the dominant mechanism that contributes to fan noise [4,5]. On the one hand, tonal noise can be more easily controlled by clever choice of blade counts according to Tyler & Sofrin rules [6] and taking advantage of the duct ﬁltering to have the ﬁrst Blade Passing Frequency (BPF) cut-off for instance. Moreover proper nacelle and exhaust duct liners can also damp both forward and backward propagating tones [4]. On the other hand, broadband noise has a signiﬁcant contribution much harder to control especially at high frequencies given the high number of cut-on modes for modern engines with low hub-to-tip ratio. Yet, with future noise regulations for commercial aircrafts [7,8], it becomes mandatory to get a better understanding of the noise generation and propagation for fan and OGV interaction broadband noise in order to be able to properly guide further noise reduction technology development.
Progress in High Performance Computing (HPC) has allowed for the correct prediction of complex ﬂows around isolated parts of turbomachines with Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS), unsteady RANS, Large Eddy Simulations (LES) and high-ﬁdelity Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS) as shown in reviews from Tucker [9] and McMullan et al. [10]. However, only the latter two methods (LES and DNS) can provide the multi-scale noise sources that yield broadband noise. A recent review from Gourdain et al. [11] gives an overview of LES industrial compressor ﬂows and reports simulations with full stages highlighting the cost of LES for multistage compressors [12,13]. But all these simulations involved low-pressure compressor with small blade spans, reduced rotor-stator distances and moderate Reynolds numbers based on the chord. Only de Laborderie et al. [12] considered the noise generation, but stressed the diﬃculties of predictions associated with limited passage simulations. More recently high-pressure turbines have been considered that involve both higher Mach and Reynolds numbers [14], and dealt with their noise generation and the propagation of combustion noise through them [15].
In that context, the “Fan Noise Source Diagnostic Test” (SDT) experimental set-up was investigated by NASA providing an extensive database of aerodynamic sources and aeroacoustic diagnostics of the broadband fan/OGV interaction mechanism [16–18]. This comprehensive study is dedicated to the validation of numerical and analytical methods and has recently become an AIAA benchmark case for fan broadband noise.
The present work focuses on the only Large-Eddy Simulation (LES) of this conﬁguration at the moment, in combination with acoustic analogies for noise prediction to investigate the rotor/stator interaction mechanism. It provides an in-depth analysis of the instantaneous aerodynamic features of this turbofan conﬁguration and the comparison of two acoustic analogies for noise propagation. This investigation is the continuation of the preliminary work presented by Leonard et al. with converged ﬂow and acoustic statistics [19]. In the latter, the streamwise turbulent length scale was extracted from the LES results and used in Hanson’s [20] and Posson’s models [21] to predict the far-ﬁeld noise. The prime focus has been on the noise generated by the fan/ OGV pressure ﬂuctuations and its link with the impingement of the passing turbulent rotor wakes. A precise description of the state of turbulence reaching the stator vanes leading edge is therefore mandatory, which strongly justiﬁed the LES. The NASA experiment is summarized in the next section. The complete numerical model and parameters are then provided. Finally both aerodynamic and acoustic results from the LES are shown.
As part of the NASA advanced Subsonic Technology Noise Reduction Program, several experiments [16–18,22,23] have been carried out on the Source Diagnostic Test rig presented in Fig. 1(a) involving different geometries and counts of the rotor blades and stator outlet vanes [22]. The conﬁguration studied here is the baseline conﬁguration designed by General Electric Aircraft Engines which is composed of 22 rotor blades (R4) and 54 radial stator vanes (Fig. 1(b)). This 1/5th scale model fan stage is representative of the secondary stream of current High Bypass-Ratio turbofan engines. Note that the experimental set-up does not involve a core ﬂow.
The fan stage has been tested in take-off and approach conditions, but only the approach condition that has the most exten- sive experimental data set has been simulated numerically. Free-stream Mach number of 0.10 is imposed, to achieve acoustic ﬂight effect and to provide far-ﬁeld acoustic data representative of real take-off and approach conditions [18]. The rotational speed at approach is 7808 rpm corresponding to 61.7% of the rotor design speed.
The overall test program had many phases, including detailed ﬂow ﬁeld diagnostic measurements using laser Doppler and hot- wire anemometry [17,23] and acoustic power measurements [18].
 
To decrease the computational costs of the simulations, only a periodic portion of the fan stage is simulated. Since the rotor- stator interface condition used for the LES simulation requires to have domains of the same angular extent in the rotor and stator parts, the number of outlet guide vanes has been modiﬁed from 54 to 55 allowing a 2𝜋∕11 angular periodicity in both
domains. The geometrical transformation has been performed as in Refs. [14,24] adjusting the vane aspect ratios to maintain the same solidity and stay as close as possible to the experimental operating point (see Table 1). Using the OPTIBRUI platform for the analytical prediction of axial fan noise [19,25], it was veriﬁed that similar broadband noise levels should be expected as similar ranges of cut-on modes are found for both conﬁgurations. The computational domain shown in Fig. 2 not only contains the fan stage but also the nacelle and outside ﬂow. The deﬁnition of the domain, avoids the need of an inlet condition inside of the turbofan which may affect the acoustic propagation in the nacelle and allows the ﬂow to establish itself from the free ﬂow and the fan rotational speed like in the experimental wind tunnel. Downstream the exiting jet and the mixing layer will also be accounted for in the simulation which also prevents from modifying the acoustic transmission at the end of the nacelle.
The domain is divided in two parts: the stator domain is composed of the outside region and the vane row, while the rotor domain is limited to the rotor row and the rotor wake development region. The interfaces between the two parts are shown by the brown surfaces in Fig. 2.
The unstructured mesh used in the present study for both RANS and LES simulations is shown along a blade-to-blade view at mid-channel height in Fig. 3. The spatial discretization around the blades and in the wakes of the blades has been a prime focus: 8 layers of prisms have been imposed on the blades and vane skin in order to have a good discretization of the near-wall region. The tip region is discretized with 8 layers of prisms and an average of 7 tetrahedral elements to reach the casing (about 15 overall cells) which is more than twice as ﬁne than the extra ﬁne-tripped LBM simulation on this conﬁguration [26]. The minimum size of the ﬁrst prism layer reaches 0.0007 rotor chords (0.05 mm).
The cell size in the rotor wake is progressively increased until reaching the rotor-stator interface where a constant mesh size of 0.02 rotor chords is used. Upstream of the rotor blades the mesh is uniform and coarsen up to a mesh size of 0.05 rotor chords at the entrance of the nacelle. For the outside domain, the nacelle nearby region and the mixing layers are reﬁned. However, the grid is still relatively coarse compared to the inside, the goal being to obtain the mean effect of the mixing layer and not necessary to resolve the turbulent structures precisely. The resulting mesh is composed of 75 million cells (15 million nodes) of which over 95% are used to discretize the inside domain. The domain cut-off frequency is estimated to be about 10 kHz at the inlet interface (upstream of the rotor) and 20 kHz 1 stator chord downstream of the stator. The minimum cut-off frequency at the blade skin (used for far-ﬁeld propagation) is about 35 kHz and 30 kHz for the rotor and stator respectively.
parallel code coupler OpenPALM [28] which interpolates and exchanges the residuals at each iteration over overlapping grids [29].
The numerical scheme for the present LES is an explicit Lax-Wendroff second order scheme both in space and time. The time step for the simulation has been set to approximately 2.5 × 10−5 ms to have 14, 000 iterations per blade passage. The sub-grid scale model used is the Wall-Adapting Local Eddy-viscosity model (WALE) that provides the proper turbulence decay toward the walls. As for the turbine cases [14], a log-law model (which switches to a linear model for y+ < 11.445) is applied on all
walls to be consistent with the above y+ values and to ensure a physical friction on the walls. The dimensionless wall-normal distance y+ of the ﬁrst cell at the wall computed from an average solution from the LES is presented in Fig. 4. The Thanks to the prisms layers, the y+ is under 50 on the whole blade skin, whereas it is coarser on the hub and casing surfaces where prisms have not been used. At the inlet and outlet, Navier-Stokes characteristic non-reﬂective boundary conditions are used combined with a sponge layer to avoid spurious reﬂections from vortical ﬂuctuations [30].
The end of the transient period and the beginning of the statistics recording has been chosen according not only to the stabi- lization of the operating point but also to a method based on local quantities from Mockett et al. for statistical error estimation of ﬁnite time signals [31]. To assess this local convergence, several pressure probes have been used in various regions to ensure that the turbulence actually reached a statistically converged regime everywhere. Three convergence plots of those probes are shown in Fig. 5.
After a transient regime of about 4 rotation times, statistics have been extracted from the simulation during approximately 9 rotations (about 70 ms or 18 blade passages). The statistical error estimated on the mean and the standard deviation are around 0.2% and 3.0% respectively in the fan stage and around 0.2% and 6.0% in the jet mixing layer. Overall the convergence of the
statistics is very good on both the mean and the Root Mean Square (RMS) of the ﬂow variables. For acoustic post-processing, wall-pressure ﬂuctuations have also been extracted during that time every 20 time steps of the simulation (which corresponds approximately to a 2, 000 kHz sampling rate) on the rotor and stator blades.
The full simulation, including the transient regime, took 15 days on 3000 CPUs on the supercomputer Mammoth-MP2 from Université de Sherbrooke (1500 CPUs for the static domain, and 1500 CPUs for the rotor domain).
The mass-ﬂow rate and total pressure ratio computed from the two simulations are compared in Table 1 with measurements obtained by Hughes et al. [16]. The mass-ﬂow rate differs from experiments by less than 3% whereas the pressure ratio differs less than 1%. Similar RANS results were obtained by the various participants of the benchmark with different codes and turbu-lence models. As expected, predicted performance is different because the simulated tip clearance corresponds to the sideline “hot” geometry with maximum loading that does not account for the same blade deformation in rotation. Moreover, the slight geometry modiﬁcations performed on the stator vane count have a minor impact on the fan stage operating conditions.
Iso-contours of Mach number are presented on blade-to-blade surfaces at three channel heights in Fig. 6. Flow is moving
from left to right. Instantaneous LES ﬁelds are shown in the left column. The mean ﬁelds for the LES and the RANS simulations are seen in the center and right columns respectively. The instantaneous LES snapshots clearly illustrate the turbulent nature of the ﬂow in the stage. At all heights, a quasi laminar ﬂow is seen on the pressure side of the rotor blade and a turbulent boundary layer on its suction side, becoming thicker with increasing radius (increased relative speeds). The turbulent rotor wakes are then convected toward the stator vanes. As was found in the CME2 compressor simulations in similar ﬂow conditions with three different codes [12,32,33], the wake impingement does not trigger the transition to turbulence at the stator leading edge (too low Reynolds number), which rather occurs at vane mid-chord. Moreover from the instantaneous snapshots at 50% channel height, an intermittent ﬂow detachment at the leading edge of the rotor is seen to shed vortices that graze along the blade suction sides. A complex turbulent ﬂow behavior is seen at 97% channel height caused by the tip gap vortices with some intermittent ﬂow separation on one stator-vane pressure side. Note that similar ﬂow behavior has been reported by Casalino et al. using a hybrid Lattice-Boltzmann/Very Large Eddy Simulation (LBM/VLES) model of the baseline SDT conﬁguration [26]. Yet, in this hybrid model a tripping device needed to be introduced close to the blade leading edge over the whole span to trigger transition to turbulence and yield the proper turbulent levels in the wake. No tip gap caused by the voxel resolution could also be captured in the coarsest simulations.
The mean ﬂow described by both numerical approaches is very similar at midspan. Nevertheless, the LES boundary layers are thinner on the rotor blades (no recirculation bubble as in the RANS) yielding slightly thinner rotor wakes with less velocity deﬁcits than in the RANS results. This effect is emphasized at the hub where the wakes are clearly thinner in the LES than in the RANS simulation. For both spanwise locations, the mean ﬂow in the stator domain is very close in the RANS simulation to the one found in LES in spite of the very different approach used for the rotor-stator interface. Close to the tip, however, the mean ﬂow is signiﬁcantly different in the two simulations. On the one hand, the RANS calculation predicts a large ﬂow detachment on the rotor blade leading edge which interacts strongly with the tip leakage ﬂow. On the other hand, the deviation induced by the rotor tip ﬂow has an effect on the stator ﬂow resulting in important ﬂow separations at the tip of the outlet guide vanes that do not appear in the LES, which is again quite similar to what was found in the CME2 compressor case [12,32,33]. It should be emphasized that such ﬂow separations predicted by the RANS simulations were neither observed experimentally nor in the tripped LBM/VLES case.
Fig. 7 presents the ﬁeld of the normalized component of axial velocity in an axial cut at mid-distance between the rotor trailing edge and the stator leading edge where hot-wire (HW) measurements have been performed by Podboy et al. [23]. The values are normalized by the respective (experimental, RANS or LES) mean axial velocity at the axial plane of interest in order to take into account deviations from the experimental operational point given in Table 1. The twisting effect on the rotor wake in the interstage by the differential transport of the wake vorticity by the mean swirl is well captured by all simulations. On the upper part of the channel, the radial oscillations (S-shape) observed in the RANS wake proﬁle (seen in all benchmark RANS simulations) are the consequence of the tip ﬂow detachment from the leading-edge and is not present in the LES. Both in the LES and RANS the top 10% of the channel are strongly affected by the tip leakage ﬂow. The strong axial velocity deﬁcit results in a higher ﬂow blockage. The ﬂow blockage is illustrated in Fig. 9 by measuring the mass-ﬂow rate m˙ for several segments of span h/H% and computing it in experiments assuming that the density proﬁles follow the same linear trend from hub to casing as in the computations and that experimental mass-ﬂow rate of 26.44 is recovered when adding all segments.
The mass-ﬂow rate from the computations closely follow experiments over most of the duct section. In the top 10% the mass-ﬂow rate drops about 20 and 10% for RANS and LES respectively which may still suggest an insuﬃcient mesh resolution in the tip clearance or in the casing boundary layer. Yet as mentioned above, the different geometry used in the simulation does not take into account the same blade deformation in rotation and thus, the gap is different than in the experiments. Finally the LES normalized axial velocity outside the wake agrees well with experiments, even though the wake deﬁcit is under-predicted by 5%.
The unsteady nature of the LES also allows to obtain statistics of the resolved turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations: the three normalized RMS % components of the velocity are presented in Fig. 8 along with the experimental results. The turbulence pattern obtained by LES, for both the wakes and the tip secondary ﬂow, shows a good agreement with the experiments. In fact, not only the turbulence intensity is accurately reproduced but also the distribution on the three components is very similar all across the channel height with hardly any turbulence near the hub and transition to turbulence at mid-span.
Moreover in the wake, the three components have similar levels in most of the channel height, the tangential component being the lowest of the three as highlighted in another turbofan stage studied by Bonneau et al. [34] with a ZDES approach. Close to the casing, the tip clearance ﬂows cause a noticeable decrease of the radial ﬂuctuations in favor of the axial and tangential components as already shown by Leonard et al. (Fig. 14 in Ref. [19]). Similar results have also been reported by Casalino et al. with a LBM/VLES approach (Fig. 7 in Ref. [26]). The anisotropy invariants I2 and I3 are computed in the rotor wake at several radial and axial positions and depicted in the Lumley triangle in Fig. 10 [35]. The invariants illustrate preferential directions of the turbulent stress ﬁeld. They are computed as
where tr denotes the trace, det its determinant and A is the non-dimensional form of the anisotropy tensor with components deﬁned as
where the overline denotes the temporal average, u is the velocity ﬂuctuation of the respective component and 𝛿 is the Kro- necker delta. As expected from the levels of the RMS components, all values are close to the isotropic limit.
One advantage of LES is to give access to detailed information on the turbulence development and can help understand its inﬂuence on the noise sources of the turbofan operating at approach condition. The turbulent structures are identiﬁed using an iso-surface of Q-criterion computed in the rotor reference frame in Fig. 11. Q stands for the second invariant of the velocity- gradient tensor. Each blade side is shown from its leading edge.
As already mentioned for the instantaneous Mach number contours, while the boundary layer on the rotor-blade suction side is turbulent starting from the leading edge, the favorable pressure gradient on the pressure side limits the development of the turbulence (quasi laminar along the whole blade span): the boundary layer is initially laminar and some turbulent spots can be localized by the appearance of vertical vortex structures on the upper part of the blade only. On 30% of the blade span close to the hub, hardly any turbulent structures are visible on the pressure side revealing that the boundary layer stays in a quasi laminar state. The temperature contours coloring the iso-Q further stress that high ﬂow shearing and skin friction typical of turbulent ﬂows only occur on the upper part of both sides of the rotor blades. In the lower part of the channel shown in Fig. 7, the blades generate a very thin wake and low velocity deﬁcit. The laminar to turbulent boundary layer transition cannot be captured by the present RANS approach as it assumes the boundary layer to be turbulent right from the leading edge. The early boundary layer development yields larger wake width in the lower part of the channel in Fig. 7. The tip leakage generates large coherent structures that interact with the pressure side provoking the large velocity deﬁcit in the upper part of the channel.
Dynamic Mode Decompositions (DMD) has been performed on the pressure signals on the rotor blade skin in the rotating reference frame [36]. This signal processing method allows to detect and extract a set of dominant modes in a given complex ﬂow [15]. Fig. 12(a) shows the mode associated with the relative vane passing frequency (VPF). Note that the rotor blade is again seen from its leading edge. In the lower part of the blade pressure side where the boundary layer is laminar, a periodic wave going upstream can be seen, representing the acoustic pressure wave generated by wake interaction on the stator vanes traveling upstream. On the suction side a similar pattern can be guessed but it is hidden in the hydrodynamic ﬂuctuations and turbulent vortices.
Further evidence of the above ﬂow and acoustic features is provided by the wall-pressure power spectral densities (PSD) presented in Fig. 12(b). These PSD are computed from the pressure signals of two probes in both the laminar (15% of blade span) and turbulent parts (85% of blade span) of the pressure side of the rotor blade. On the one hand, the spectrum of the probe located in the laminar region has much lower levels with an early and quick roll-off at mid-frequency. It also presents a hump around the stator passing frequency. On the other hand, in the turbulent region the spectrum is broadband with no particular tonal frequency. This acoustic tone is again masked by the turbulent pressure ﬂuctuations.
The unsteady pressure recorded on the stator vane skin has been used for far-ﬁeld noise prediction with two different analo- gies, the Ffowcs Williams & Hawkings’ (FWH) analogy in free ﬁeld, and the extension of Goldstein’s analogy to annular ducts [37].
The FWH analogy allows to directly propagate the stator wall-pressure ﬂuctuations to the far-ﬁeld without any duct reﬂec- tions in order to then compute the acoustic power. Indeed from the resulting acoustic pressure p′(x, t) a surface integration over an upstream half-sphere S− and a downstream half-sphere S+ is performed to evaluate the intake and exhaust power:
dropped from the duct eigenfunction Em,𝜇 as it is a real function. In Eq. (10), the subscript I represents the reference coordinate system I , the coordinate vector xI0 = (rI0, 𝜃I0, xI0) constitutes the coordinates of the cell-centers on the surface elements.
Both analogies can be used following two different approaches. The ﬁrst one is obtained by computing the acoustic power
from Eq. (3) or Eq. (6) for FWH and Goldstein’s analogy respectively) independently for each blade, and then doing a summation over all of them. This calculation does not take into account any blade-to-blade correlation as the phase is lost when computing the norm in Eqs. (3) and (6). The second approach takes into account blade-to-blade correlations. For the FWH free-
ﬁeld analogy, the acoustic power S± (𝜔) in Eq. (3) is directly computed from the pressure ﬂuctuations p′ from Eq. (4) from all the
the blades in the computational domain and then calculating the norm of the expected value. Last, the pressure amplitudes are scaled by the ratio of total vane count and computed vane number. The phase shift of the vanes that are not directly computed is not yet taken into account in this work.
The results from the FWH analogy (noted as FWH Uncorr. and FWH Corr. for the uncorrelated and correlated summation respectively) and for Goldstein’s in-duct analogy (noted as Goldstein Uncorr. and Goldstein Corr.) are compared with the mea- surements [18] in Fig. 13(a) and (b). In the experiments, sound power is measured upstream by means of an acoustic screen to hide the downstream contributions. Then this contribution is subtracted from the acoustic power measured without the screen to get the exhaust information. The mock-up was also run without the stator row to measure the contribution from the fan only. The latter is then subtracted from the acoustic power measured with the fan-OGV conﬁguration to isolate the OGV contribution. Unfortunately, the experimental rotor-alone broadband noise levels eventually overtake the fan-OGV noise lev- els at some frequencies. This behavior is potentially caused by the strong swirling ﬂow at the nacelle exit interacting with the pylon.
The numerical predictions using the pressure ﬂuctuations on the stator as equivalent dipoles for both analogies provide an overall good agreement with experiment both in terms of levels and shape. The largest differences in levels (up to 10 dB higher than the fan-OGV measurements) are seen at low frequencies which highlights that additional noise mechanisms may be present in the simulation. Leonard et al. [19] already showed that the rotor-alone predictions were overpredicted because of too large coherent structures present in the tip gap region (under-resolved region in the LES). Such structures typically yield low-frequency humps observed in low-speed fans [39], which could correspond to the hump above 2 kHz in Fig. 13(a) and (b). Moreover, the differences with experiments are higher toward the intake since the reﬂections on the rotor blades are not taken into account. The effect of the reﬂections was shown analytically for the present conﬁguration by Posson and Moreau [40] and numerically by Casalino et al. [26].
The results obtained with Goldstein’s analogy extended to annular ducts are closer to the experimental data, especially toward the exhaust demonstrating the limitation of using a free-ﬁeld acoustic propagation for this conﬁguration. The nacelle plays a crucial ﬁltering role on the wave propagation: different duct-modes with distinct energy levels are cut-off yielding the sharper spectral decay at high frequencies seen both experimentally and numerically compared to the free-ﬁeld case. According to the number of blades and vanes, the BPF and its ﬁrst harmonics should be cut-off. However, the peak at 2863 Hz which corresponds to the BPF is visible with both approaches because only 5 vanes have been simulated and the Tyler & Sofrin rules [6] only apply for a full (axisymmetric) conﬁguration. Nonetheless, the peak is reduced by 10 dB in the second approach when the correlation of the 5 vanes is taken into account. The spurious peak also contributes to the above low-frequency over-prediction which shows the very strong sensitivity of the destructive interference in tone cut-off conditions. Finally the current agreement
with experiments at the exhaust is similar to what Casalino et al. obtained with the hybrid LBM/VLES approach (Fig. 12 in Ref. [26]), where the LES yields a better high-frequency decay because of the higher resolution of the vane noise sources.
The Large Eddy Simulation of the scale-model simpliﬁed NASA SDT turbofan has been successfully achieved for the ﬁrst time at approach condition for the reference stator-vane case. This simulation has been performed on the complete nacelle and fan- OGV experimental set-up with a slightly modiﬁed vane count to reduce the computational domain in the azimuthal direction.
The simulation was initialized from a preliminary steady RANS simulation of the same set-up using a k − 𝜔 SST turbulence
model. This conﬁguration is of particular interest since it provides a set of detailed experimental data not only for aerodynamics but also for acoustics. It is then a good test case to evaluate the ability of LES to reproduce the turbulent ﬂow in a fan stage but also to test different acoustic models for noise emission and propagation.
Both RANS and LES results have shown a good agreement with experiments on the mean aerodynamic ﬂow properties. However, the RANS simulation presents a leading-edge recirculation bubble at the tip of the rotor blade yielding a downstream S-shape rotor wake, which is not observed in the LES that only presents some intermittent vortex shedding grazing on the suction side. Similarly some ﬂow separation is observed at the tip of the stator vanes in the RANS results, which is neither found in the experiments nor in the LES. Noticeably the LES transitions to turbulence on the rotor-blade suction side close to the leading edge because of the sharp local acceleration, which could not be obtained in less resolved hybrid LBM/VLES results without tripping. The comparison of turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations with hot-wire measurements has shown that the LES also gives an accurate representation of turbulence in the wake. Noticeably, the bottom part of the wake is essentially laminar and much thinner in the LES than in the RANS that assumes turbulent ﬂow over the whole passage. From the RMS components and the anisotropy invariants, the turbulence is shown to be mostly isotropic in the wake which conﬁrms the validity of this commonly made hypothesis in most analytical models such as Hanson’s or Posson’s. Similarly to what was found in low-pressure compressors at similar Reynolds number based on the chord, the transition on the stator vanes is not directly triggered by the rotor wake impingement but rather occurs at mid-chord.
Finally, the LES has the advantage to provide unsteady wall-pressure signals on the stator vanes, which can be used as equivalent noise sources for both Ffowcs Williams & Hawkings’ analogy in free space, and the generalized Goldstein’s analogy extended to annular ducts. The sound power level spectra obtained with both analogies present the right trend but over- estimate the noise level at low frequency, most likely because the present tip gap is larger than in the experiments and the tip ﬂow structures are still under-resolved in the present detailed simulation. Moreover, the spurious low-frequency tonal noise may be caused by the limited number of blades in the present model. The correlated addition of the acoustic power for Goldstein’s analogy noticeably reduces the level of this tone. Yet at mid and high frequencies (up to 20 kHz at least), the results from Goldstein’s analogy match the experimental OGV spectra well both in terms of levels and shape, much better than the FWH results that overpredict the radiated sound power, which stresses the importance of accounting for the decay of cut-off modes in this frequency range taking place within the duct. An improved agreement over a larger frequency range is also observed compared with the less resolved hybrid LBM/VLES results with tripping.
Computations were made on the supercomputer Mammoth-MP2 from Université de Sherbrooke, managed by Calcul Québec and Compute Canada. The operation of this supercomputer is funded by the CFI, NanoQuébec, RMGA and FRQNT. The authors would like to thank E. Envia from NASA for fruitful discussions and technical support and for providing the experimental data in the framework of the AIAA benchmark.

This study introduces an analytical model aiming at predicting the tonal acoustic sources generated and radiated by the rotor–stator interaction in a fan stage. This model is able to cope with complex three-dimensional stator geometries and it fully accounts for cascade effects, characteristic of modern fan stages. It is based on a proper description of the rotor wake coupled with an analytic cascade response function and with an acoustic analogy. The proposed model is validated for the ﬁrst time against acoustic sources and sound power measurements, on the Advanced Noise Control Fan from NASA. On this conﬁg-uration representative of an actual fan stage, the model is shown to predict tonal sources and powers accurately, in function of the rotational velocity and of the stator-vane count. Another realistic conﬁguration, namely the low-pressure CME2 research compressor, is then considered in order to demonstrate the suitability of the model to be used as a design tool in an industrial context. A parametric study concerning both the stator vane sweep and lean angles is performed on this rotor–stator stage. The model produces predictions consistent with studies from literature, quantifying the effectiveness of swept and leaned vanes as a tonal noise reduction mechanism. This parametric study allows deﬁning an optimal stator design for minimal noise emission.
In the future of aircraft propulsion, the Ultra-High Bypass Ratio (UHBR) turbofan architecture is promising as it leads to an overall efﬁciency improvement and to a decrease of pollutants emission with respect to the current generation of aeroengines. In particular, the gain in propulsive efﬁciency is partly reached with a larger fan diameter. However the larger nacelle associated with this conﬁguration implies a drag increase that is detrimental to the overall engine efﬁciency. Thus a UHBR nacelle has to be shortened. This in turn induces shorter rotor–stator distances, more pronounced inlet and outlet distorsions and less efﬁcient passive treatment that reduces fan noise propagating outside of the nacelle. Therefore, in the frame of fan noise source reduction, the current work aims at improving fan noise modelling. As stated by several authors,
e.g. Groeneweg et al. [1], Envia et al. [2] and Peake and Parry [3], the interaction of fan wakes with the downstream outlet guide vanes (OGVs) represents the main source of fan noise, a trend growing with the expected decrease of the rotor–stator spacing in UHBR. A blade wake is composed of a mean velocity deﬁcit creating a periodic ﬂuctuation in time and in the azimuthal direction in the stator reference frame. Convected with the mean ﬂow, these wakes interact with the vane leading edges generating pressure ﬂuctuations on the whole vane surfaces. This unsteady loading radiates acoustic waves propagating within the nacelle, at the blade passing frequency (BPF) and its higher harmonics. This mechanism corresponds to the rotor–stator interaction tonal noise. Moreover turbulent structures present in blade wakes, upon interaction with the downstream vanes, generate random wall pressure ﬂuctuations that radiate to form the rotor–stator interaction broadband noise [4]. The current study focuses on fan tonal noise as it becomes crucial in UHBR because of the less efﬁcient passive treatment as well as the decrease of the rotor–stator gap creating a larger interaction of the rotor wakes with the stator.
Several types of Computational Aero-Acoustics (CAA) methods aiming at the prediction of fan tonal noise have been developed [2]. Among them, a ﬁrst category uses Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) equations to compute the viscous blade wakes downstream of the rotor. This vortical excitation is then imposed at the inlet of a stator domain on which the linearised Euler equations are numerically solved. This approach has for instance been implemented within the LINFLUX code, that computes the vane row acoustic response in the frequency domain, by Montgomery and Verdon [5], Verdon [6] and Prasad and Verdon [7]. The method of Atassi et al. [8] also uses linearised Euler equations to predict the acoustic response of the vane cascade. With such an approach, actual vane and duct geometries are accounted for in the source and near-ﬁeld acoustic prediction. A second category of methods, based on the Unsteady Reynolds-Averaged Navier– Stokes (URANS) equations, has been successfully surveyed by several authors [9–12]. These approaches allow considering a realistic ﬂow, particularly the vane mean loading and the inﬂuence of the stator on the rotor wakes, in the acoustic pre- diction. However the computational cost associated with these numerical methods still prevents them to be routinely used in an industrial context, especially for pre-design and parametric studies. This is the reason why analytical approaches represent an interesting compromise as they provide fast and exact solutions of simpliﬁed problems. The response function of Amiet [13], extended by Paterson and Amiet [14], Moreau et al. [15] and Roger et al. [16], deals with the interaction of an aerodynamic gust with a single airfoil in free-ﬁeld. In this model, suited for low solidity rotors without external casings such as helicopter rotors, propellers, contra-rotating open rotors and ventilators, the airfoil is modelled as an inﬁnitely thin ﬂat plate immersed in a uniform inviscid ﬂow with zero incidence (neither vane camber nor mean loading). The asymptotic analyses of Myers and Kerschen [17] and Evers and Peake [18] allow considering some mean loading effects in the response. For low solidity ducted fans, as proposed by Glegg [19] for instance, the isolated response can be coupled with Green's function tailored to a duct developed by Goldstein [20]. However cascade effect, i.e. the inﬂuence of the neighbouring vanes on the source generation and radiation of a given vane, has to be considered in a modern fan stage where vanes overlap. For the interaction of a gust with a rectilinear ﬂat plat cascade, the models are based on the resolution of an integral equation, using the acceleration potential method [21] or the lifting surfaces methods [22], leading to the LINSUB code for instance [23–26]. Namba and Schulten's and Zhang et al.'s model [27–29], also based on a lifting surface method, account for an annular cascade and the casing walls, but are limited to vanes with zero stagger angle and no radial geometrical variations. Another group of cascade models is based on a closed-form analytical solution of the integral equation with the Wiener– Hopf technique, successively extended by Mani and Hovray [30], Koch [31], Peake [32] and Glegg [33]. Posson et al. [34] extended Glegg's work to the calculation of the unsteady vane loading and of the pressure ﬁeld in the vane passage. In the cascade model of Hanson [4], also based on the Wiener–Hopf technique and Glegg's blade response, the strip theory approach allows accounting for variable stator geometry along the duct height, but the acoustic power is evaluated in free ﬁeld and decorrelated from one strip to another one. Finally, another approach consists in considering the actual annular distribution of acoustic sources on the stator vanes as well as their radiation within an annular duct, contrary to the free ﬁeld acoustic radiation from a rectilinear cascade. In the model of Ventres et al. [35], the unsteady vane loading is obtained via a numerical resolution of the integral equation then radiated with the annular duct Green's function of Goldstein [20]. This model, developed for fan tonal and broadband noise applications, has been extended by Meyer and Envia [36], Nal- lasamy and Envia [37] and Grace et al. [38]. Finally the model of Posson et al. [39], using a purely analytical solution for the acoustic sources and the in-duct radiation with Goldstein's analogy, has been applied and validated for fan broadband noise predictions.
Tonal fan noise modelling is challenging mainly because the sound emission is sensitive to the stator geometry and because the excitation and the vane response are correlated along the duct height. This is why the present model, based on the analytical cascade response function of Posson et al. [34], uses a radial strip approach in order to consider a complex stator geometry, with variable stagger, sweep and lean angles for the vanes. Moreover this cascade response is coupled with Green's function developed by Goldstein [20] so as to account for the annular duct geometry and an axial mean ﬂow in the acoustic propagation. The aerodynamic excitation is decomposed into skewed gusts that are coupled with the 3D cascade response to ensure a correct representation of the radially correlated vane response. Although this tonal noise model has already been used in preliminary studies [40,41], the ﬁrst objective of the paper consists in performing a complete description of this cascade based acoustic model, in focusing particularly on the complex stator geometry and the aero- dynamic excitation. Then Section 3 aims at validating the model against experimental data collected on the Advanced Noise Control Fan (ANCF) conﬁguration [42,43]. The latter is representative of an actual fan stage of a modern aeroengine and exhaustive available datasets allow performing trends with the vane count and the rotational velocity. Finally the model is evaluated in Section 4 on the CME2 axial compressor stage [44], at higher reduced frequencies than on the ANCF conﬁg- uration. Parametric studies on the vane geometry are performed in order to highlight the model capability of handling complex stator conﬁgurations and of determining an optimal acoustic design.
In this section, the cascade based acoustic model of Posson et al. [34,39], originally developed for fan broadband noise applications, is generalised to fan tonal noise prediction. The conﬁguration treated here, represented in Fig. 1, is a rotor– stator stage mounted in an annular duct. The cylindrical reference frames Rr ðxd; rd; θrÞ and Rdðxd; rd; θdÞ are direct and linked to the rotor and the stator respectively, with xd directed downstream. The rotor is composed of B blades and the stator of V vanes. In order to account for complex blade and vane geometries present in modern turbofan engines, i.e. with stagger, sweep and lean angles varying along the duct height, both the rotor and stator rows are split into annular strips along the span. Each strip at radius rd is then unwrapped into a local rectilinear geometry represented in Fig. 2. The direct Cartesian reference frame R0ðxd; yd; zdÞ is attached to the rectilinear cascade of inﬁnite span ﬂat plates. Following a literature review, it appears necessary to propose a uniﬁed formulation of the equations in order to account for any rotational direction. Indeed,
Fig. 2(a) corresponds to the conﬁguration with the rotational speed Ωo0 used in the model of Posson et al. [34] for instance, whereas Fig. 2(b) represents the conﬁguration treated in the model of Ventres et al. [35] as well as in its further extensions [36,45] with Ω40. The frames Rr and Rd are linked by the following relation, Ω being a relative speed from now on:
In the Rd reference frame, the geometrical sweep φ^ ðrdÞ and lean ψ^ ðrdÞ angles of the vane are deﬁned in Figs. 3 and 4, looking successively from the side and the front of the cascade. It is worth noting that φ^ is independent of the rotational velocity sign, whereas the sign of ψ^ changes with the sign of Ω, as depicted in Fig. 4. Moreover an arbitrary ðyf ; zf Þ surface is introduced, viewed from the side in Fig. 3 (dotted grey line), on which the aerodynamic data (mean ﬂow and rotor wake) are extracted to be input within the model. For an efﬁcient interaction modelling, this surface has to follow the vane leading edge radial evolution. 
The change of coordinates is chosen to only deal with direct reference frames thus implying the direction yd in R0 to be in the opposite direction than θd (in Rd), for any sign of the rotational velocity (see Fig. 2). In R0 the sign of the vane stagger angle is always opposed to the sign of Ω. The cascade reference frame Rc is ﬁxed such as yc is in the yd direction. This imposes yc to be oriented from the pressure side (PS) to the suction side (SS) of the vane for a negative rotational velocity (Fig. 2(a)), and in the opposite direction (from SS to PS) for a positive rotational velocity (Fig. 2(b)). For both conﬁgurations, the vane number ν increases in the yc direction similarly to the convention adopted by Glegg [33].
The rotor wakes formed at the blade trailing edges are convected with the subsonic mean ﬂow and interact with the downstream stator vanes, creating unsteady wall pressure ﬂuctuations that correspond to the tonal acoustic sources. More precisely, following the deﬁnition of Sutliff et al. [42], the aerodynamic excitation corresponds to the velocity component w normal to the direction given by the mass-averaged absolute ﬂow angle α (see Fig. 2). Assuming that this excitation is identical from one rotor blade to another one, it becomes 2π=B-periodic in the azimuthal direction as well as periodic in time with the blade passing pulsation qBΩ. Using the following convention for the temporal Fourier series:
From Eq. (7) only the coefﬁcient W q contributes to the cascade response at the qth harmonic of the blade passing frequency (BPF). Because of the no-slip condition on both the hub and casing walls, the absolute ﬂow velocity is zero in a ducted fan stage at these locations. Thus the upwash velocity can be 
This 3D decomposition aims at a better representation of the incident perturbation than the 2D approach described with Eq. (7). Indeed the latter implies that the radial evolution of the wake properties are only treated by variations of amplitudes with the parameter rd. A 3D decomposition allows accounting for the radial gradients of the perturbation [46] as well as for the radial correlation known to be signiﬁcative for a tonal noise excitation [47]. The principle of the 3D decomposition proposed in Eq. (9) has been validated in [40] but it has never been confronted to an experimental database.
From aerodynamic measurements or simulations, the mean velocity proﬁle U as well as the upwash w decomposed in Section 2.2 are extracted in the ðyf ; zf Þ surface introduced in Section 2.1. As a general rule for the interaction modelling, it is recommended to consider the excitation as close as possible to the vane leading edges, thus implying [48]. A particular feature of the present generalised acoustic model consists in dealing with a non-zero radial velocity component Ur in the duct reference frame Rd in order to improve the realistic ﬂow modelling. From the mean velocity vector UðUxf ; Uyf ; Uzf Þ in Rf, the velocity components in the cascade reference frame Rc are, using Eqs. (2) and (3):
Even if Ur ¼ 0, the swept vanes imply a non-zero value for Uzc in the cascade reference frame, a case already treated by Glegg [33] and Hanson [4]. From the aerodynamic radial wavenumber kr introduced in Section 2.2, it is assumed that the wavenumber along zf veriﬁes the relation:
From the azimuthal periodicity of the conﬁguration, the aerodynamic wavenumber along θd can only be equal to an inﬁnite amount of countable values. In the context of rotor–stator tonal noise, the azimuthal indices of the excitation are related to
the rotational direction such as. From Section 2.1, yd and θd are in the opposite directions thus:
since yf and yd are identical. From the dispersion relation veriﬁed by the wave vector K of the aerodynamic excitation: where. denotes a scalar product, the wavenumber in the xf direction is:
Fig. 2 illustrates that sign keeps the same sign for any value of Ω thus ensuring the independence of kxf relatively to the rotational direction. Finally the wave vector of the excitation in the cascade reference frame Rc can be found with:
crucial parameter for the cascade response is the inter-vane phase angle linking the responses of two consecutive vanes upon an interaction with a gust. Following [4], it is:
with d and h related to the inter-vane distance g ¼ 2πrd=V, represented in Fig. 2, by:
it can be shown that the inter-vane phase angle only depends on the harmonic index as
From the global conﬁguration introduced in Section 2.1, the elementary problem, represented in Fig. 5 in Rc corresponds to an aerodynamic gust of wavenumbers convected with an inviscid ﬂow of uniform velocity Uxc impinging on the cascade. This rectilinear cascade is composed of inﬁnitely thin ﬂat plates with inﬁnite span in the direction. In order to ensure the slip boundary condition on the plate surface, an unsteady pressure loading is created in response to the gust interaction. The cascade response function of Posson et al. [34] based on the previous work by Glegg [33] uses the Wiener–Hopf technique on four sub-problems to resolve the vane loading, with the following boundary conditions: con- tinuity of velocity potential upstream of the leading edge, zero velocity normal to the plate (slip condition) and pressure continuity at the trailing edge (Kutta condition). A closed form expression for the acoustic ﬁeld and for the vane loading is obtained providing that the non-overlapping distance d (see Eq. (17)) is smaller than the plate chord. the vanes partially overlap over their whole span. The analytical expression of the elementary vane loading ΔP 0 is presented in Appendix A.
Moreover the resolution needs the non-overlapped length of the cascade d to be positive, that is the case of the con- ﬁguration with Ωo0 in Fig. 5(a). In other words, s being the cascade gap, the cascade response function is valid for χ 40, with:
However a simple symmetry consideration between both conﬁgurations of Fig. 5 leads to the following relation:
since the pressure and suction sides of a vane are inverted with respect to the yc direction as in Fig. 5(a) and (b). Eq. (19) allows the cascade response function to be used for any sign of the rotational velocity while jdjoC. It must be mentioned that the semi-numerical method employed for the resolution of the cascade response of Ventres et al. [35] makes possible any value of d. The implementation of this 2D model has allowed conﬁrming the validity of Eq. (19) for 2D gusts in [48]. It has also highlighted the limitation of this semi-numerical cascade response as its accuracy depends of the amount of discretisation points, especially at high frequencies, contrary to the closed-form expression for the cascade response pre- sented in Appendix A. The present analytical cascade response has been validated in a rectilinear conﬁguration in [34] by successful comparisons with alternative models, e.g. the LINSUB model [49], the semi-numerical LINC code [22] and the three-dimensional linearised Euler code of Ataasi et al. [8].
The 3D analytical cascade response is used with a correction proposed in [50] in order to account for annular effects in an otherwise rectilinear problem. Indeed this correction has been shown to strongly reduce unphysical effects related to the strip theory approach applied to a varying geometry along the duct height [48]. Previous studies have also evaluated the vane thickness effect as well as the ﬂuid viscosity effect on fan tonal noise generation and propagation [41]. Vane thickness has been found to modify the distribution of the acoustic energy across the radial modes within each azimuthal mode. Viscous effects are of secondary importance, providing neither vortex shedding nor any secondary ﬂow with their own frequency close to tonal frequencies exists. Besides vane camber has been shown to be relevant for fan tonal noise pre- diction, and a simple method for considering vane camber effects has been proposed [51]. It is based on the coupling of two cascade response functions with different stagger angles and is not applied for the present study.
From the pressure jump P x ; z ; σ; k created by the impingement of a gust on the cascade (Eq. (A.2)), the cascade response at the qth harmonic of the BPF is written as:
For the future integration on the vane, the pressure jump needs to be expressed on the chord at constant radius Cd, inclined of φ with the chord C in Rc. Assuming a small value for φ, the pressure jump is [50]:
with Cd ¼ C= cos φ. In Eq. (20), the summation over the indices p of the radial wavenumber is actually truncated. Indeed for a given pulsation of the incoming gust qB Ω, only a limited amount of diffracted cascade acoustic modes is cut-on and directly contributes to the cascade response [4]. In addition, because of the rectilinear to annular transformation in the acoustic analogy, some cut-off modes may also have an inﬂuence on the response, especially at low frequencies [48]. That is why the criterion on kzc deﬁning the truncation of Eq. (20) corresponds to an extension of the expression given in [4]. It reads:
with CΔkzc ¼ 20, and has been shown to be relevant for the present study.
The acoustic analogy is based on the unsteady loading on the whole vane surface, analytically predicted by the cascade response function (Eq. (21)), that is used as dipole sources. Assuming that the stator is placed in an inﬁnite annular duct with a constant section and rigid walls, containing a uniform axial mean ﬂow (Uxd ¼ c0Mxd), Goldstein [20] gives the for- mulation of the acoustic pressure perceived by an observer located at point x ¼ ðxd; rd; θdÞ inside the duct at time t generated by the force f exerted at point x0 ¼ ðx0; r0; θ0Þ and time t0 by the vane surface Sðx0Þ on the ﬂuid:
with T large but ﬁnite and the monopole and quadrupole terms being neglected. G is Green's function tailored to a rigid annular duct with a uniform axial mean ﬂow thus verifying the boundary conditions on the hub and tip walls. G can be
The radial eigenfunction Em;μ, corresponding to the radial component of the solution of the Helmholtz equation, is a linear combination of Bessel functions [20]. This function Em;μ must satisfy the boundary conditions of the problem, written for a rigid duct as:
The duct eigenvalues χm;μ are the constants of the Bessel functions allowing the boundary conditions of Eq. (26) to be satisﬁed. The indices m and μ are associated with the azimuthal and radial mode orders respectively. The axial acoustic wavenumber is γ 7, the superscripts þ and - indicating respectively the upstream and downstream propagations:
For both conﬁgurations in Fig. 5, n represents the unitary vector normal to the vane, directed from the pressure to the suction side, corresponding to n ¼ -sign. Using the matrix Q (Eq. (3)), the coordinates of n in the duct reference frame are:
The ﬂow being inviscid, the force f in Eq. (23) is only composed of its component normal to the vane, i.e. the pressure distribution, thus:
The integrand of Eq. (23) is then:
Using Green's function introduced in Eqs. (24) and (29) becomes:
Using Eq. (23) applied to tonal noise and dealing only with positive frequencies qBjΩj, the acoustic pressure within the duct for the harmonic q is expressed as:
The double inﬁnite sum in Eq. (31) is limited to the acoustic duct modes (m,μ) excited by the rotor–stator interaction that verify the following relation, adapted from Tyler and Sofrin [52], providing a regular equispaced set of rotor blades and stator vanes:
integral along the xc direction of the pressure distribution in Eq. (21):
and the acoustic wavenumber in the xcd direction is:
It can be veriﬁed that the modal pressure coefﬁcient in Eq. (33) keeps the same value for any rotational direction, noting that the sign of the azimuthal index m changes between both conﬁgurations of Fig. 2. Finally the acoustic power of the harmonic q reads after integration in a duct section [36]:
Among the excited duct modes (Eq. (32)), only the cut-on modes, i.e. verifying the relation κ2 40, are considered in the
coustic power calculation of Eq. (36).
Our model dedicated to the prediction of tonal fan noise has been fully described in this section. It has been shown that this model is a generalisation of the model of Posson et al. [34,39] for fan broadband noise prediction. As stated in the introduction, this model uses successive developments from Glegg [33] and Hanson [4]. Several original contributions have been introduced within the present model in order to increase the accuracy of the prediction. First an uniﬁed formulation of the whole set of equations has been proposed in order to account for both rotational directions of the fan. A radial decomposition for the aerodynamic excitation has also been introduced. It aims at accounting for the radial correlation existing between the excitation and the cascade response along the duct height in the tonal noise context. In order to consider a realistic ﬂow, this model is able to consider the radial component of the mean ﬂow velocity. Moreover the aerodynamic input data can be extracted, from experiments or numerical simulations, on a surface matching the radial shape of the vane leading edge. This ensures an accurate gust–cascade interaction modelling, especially for vanes with complex geometries.
The tonal fan noise prediction model detailed in Section 2 is evaluated on the Advanced Noise Control Fan (ANCF) conﬁguration. This test bed has been operated at the NASA Glenn Research Center [53,54] and has supported a large amount of aeroacoustic research directed towards fan noise prediction, control and reduction [55]. The ANCF test case has been chosen as it is representative of an actual fan stage of a modern high bypass ratio turbofan. Indeed the rotor–stator stage represented in Fig. 6 is mounted in a 1.219 m (4 feet) diameter annular duct with a hub to tip ratio of 0.375. At the fre- quencies of interest, this ensures the propagation of azimuthal and radial acoustic duct modes similarly to the acoustic ﬁeld present in a nacelle. As shown in Fig. 6, the large scale structures of the inlet ﬂow are reduced by an inﬂow control device so that no additional tonal noise comes from ingested vortical structures [53]. The particularity of this test rig corresponds to the center body supporting the rotor without any structural element ﬁxed to the outer casing. Thus the rotor alone and rotor–stator conﬁgurations can be investigated without any possible strut interactions in the inlet or exhaust part of the duct. This fan rig is placed in an anechoic test facility equipped with aerodynamic and acoustic measurement devices [56,57]. In particular two rotating rakes [58] allow capturing the modal content of the acoustic ﬁeld generated by the fan stage, in a cylindrical section at the inlet and in an annular section at the exhaust, with a hub to tip ratio of 0.5 (see Fig. 6). This system provides the modal decomposition of the acoustic power used in Section 3.4 for the comparisons with the analytical predictions.
The rotor is composed of 16 blades with a 0.133 m chord. The stator vane chord is C ¼ 0.114 m with an aspect ratio of C=ðRT - RH Þ ¼ 0.3. It is radially stacked with a 12° twist without any sweep nor lean angle. In this highly conﬁgurable fan stage, the stator vane count V can vary between 13 and 30 in keeping the same vane geometry. Thus the solidity changes from CV =2πRT ¼ 0.39–0.84 at the tip. Even with these relatively low solidities, the vane stagger angle close to 0° at the tip ensures that cascade effects are present since the overlapping length is 84 percent of chord with V ¼ 13. The inter-blade row spacing, measured at the hub, can vary between 1/2 and 2 vane chords from the rotor blade trailing edge. One of the stator vanes is instrumented with ﬂush-mounted microphones on each side of the vane [43], as schematically represented in Fig. 7. This allows capturing the unsteady vane loading, partly corresponding to the tonal acoustic sources, that are com- pared with analytical predictions in Section 3.3. At nominal conditions the rotational velocity is 1800 RPM, giving a blade passing frequency (BPF) of 480 Hz, a peripheral tip Mach number around 0.34 and an axial Mach number around 0.15. The mass ﬂow rate is 56 kg s-1 and the Reynolds number based on the blade chord is around 4 x 105.
Among the investigations performed in the ANCF test rig, a particular attention is paid to the work of Sutliff et al. [42,43]. Indeed these references contain the measured vane unsteady loading and modal acoustic powers of the tonal noise gen- erated by the rotor–stator interaction, for several conﬁgurations listed in Table 1. These allow performing trend studies with the stator vane count and the rotational speed. The cut-on and excited duct modes at 1 BPF and 2 BPF in these conﬁgurations are reported in Table 1. For all these cases, the inter-row spacing is ﬁxed at half a vane chord. Moreover Sutliff et al. [42] compare the modal powers with the predictions of V072 code, corresponding to the cascade based model of Ventres et al.
[35] updated by Meyer and Envia [36]. As already mentioned in the introduction and in Section 2.4, this model is close to the present evaluated model, the main differences being the semi-numerical resolution of the 2D cascade response instead of a closed-form expression of the 3D cascade response for the current model. Note that both models use the same acoustic analogy of Goldstein [20] in an annular duct for the acoustic propagation.
In Sections 3.4 and 3.4, the acoustic model introduced in Section 2 is evaluated on the ANCF conﬁgurations listed in Table 1 against experimental results and V072 analytical predictions. The aerodynamic input data needed for these pre- dictions are also provided in [42] and consist of crossed hot-wire measurements in the plane of the stator vane leading edges, the stator being removed. Thus the convection effects on the rotor wakes are correctly taken into account, but the inﬂuence of the upstream potential effect of the stator on these wakes is absent. This potential effect may signiﬁcantly modify the shape of the rotor wake, as studied by de Laborderie et al. [59] for instance. Therefore, the vortical excitation used in the models does not exactly correspond to the actual excitation impinging on the vanes. The X-shape of the probe, placed in a plane perpendicular to the radial direction, provides the axial and tangential velocity components. The experimental uncertainty is around 0.6 m/s on the velocities and 0.2° on the angles [42]. From these two-component hot-wire data, the upwash is determined as the velocity component normal to the mass-averaged absolute ﬂow angle [42]. In order to perform relevant comparisons, the upwash over one blade passage and the mean velocity proﬁles provided in [42] are used as input data for the acoustic predictions with the present cascade model. Although the velocity proﬁles are available for the four rotational speeds of Table 1, the upwash in the stator leading edge plane is only given at 1850 RPM. It is represented in Fig. 8, where the velocity deﬁcit, indicating the rotor wake, is decreasing with the increasing radius. According to Sutliff et al. [42], the upwash for the other rotational speeds are similar to Fig. 8. However it means that the excitations used for the V072 predictions are not identical to the single one used with the present model. It has to be mentioned that the mean ﬂow properties (temperature and density), not available in [42], are coming from a more recent measurement campaign [56]. The equivalent stagger angle χ of the ﬂat plate cascade used for the V072 predictions, cor-responding to a weighted average of the inlet and outlet vane metal angles, is given in the reference paper [42].
As described in Section 3.1, one of the ANCF stator vanes is instrumented with embedded microphones, shown in Fig. 7, in order to locally measure the unsteady vane loading. The latter is known to represent the sources of rotor–stator inter-action tonal noise, as mathematically expressed in Eqs. (31)–(36). The measurements correspond to the amplitudes (in terms of sound pressure levels (SPL)) and phases of the wall pressure on each side of a vane, for all the cases reported in Table 1. These data are provided in [43]. However, for the sake of brevity, only a single case is analysed in this section, corresponding to the stator with 14 vanes and Ω ¼ 1800 RPM. Indeed for this conﬁguration, the amount of microphones is larger than for the other cases since the sensors line at 85 percent of chord in Fig. 7 is only installed in this case. These experimental data allow evaluating the cascade response function of the acoustic model introduced in Section 2.4, in its 2D and 3D versions. To this end, the measured wall pressures are ﬁrst transformed into pressure jumps across the vane, knowing that the microphones are mounted by pair at the same chordwise and spanwise locations on each side of the vane. Unlike the acoustic power comparisons performed in Section 3.4, no analytical results from the V072 cascade response function are available preventing any comparisons between both acoustic models.
Fig. 9 represents the unsteady loading at 1 BPF along the vane chord at the three spanwise positions shown in Fig. 7, measured by the microphones and predicted by the 2D and 3D versions of the cascade response function. From the vane leading edge to around 60 percent of chord, the SPL shapes are in good agreement all over the span, with a higher loading level in the leading edge region followed by a smooth decrease. This is consistent with the vane interaction noise theory (e.g. [13]) predicting that the main acoustic sources are generated in the leading edge region of the proﬁle where the incoming gust is diffracted. In Fig. 9(a), the 2D response gives a prediction closer to the experimental data than the 3D response, whereas both produce equivalent results in Fig. 9(b) and (c). Nevertheless the measured pressure jumps present a sudden SPL rise starting at around 70 percent of chord in the upper part of the vane (at 0.74RT and 0.91RT). This behaviour is not predicted by the model for which the loading monotonically decreases until the trailing edge. Referring to the original data in [43], it is shown that this local SPL increase only occurs on the vane suction side. Indeed as mentioned in [42], the mean ﬂow incomes on the vane with a relatively high incidence thus creating a ﬂow separation on the downstream part of the vane suction side that is responsible for this high level of pressure ﬂuctuations at these locations. As the model assumes a zero incidence mean ﬂow, this ﬂow separation mechanism cannot be predicted analytically. The ﬂow separation is also responsible for the high level of phase ﬂuctuations observed in Figs. 9(e) and (f). In addition, the discrepancy between the measured and predicted loading phases (Figs. 9(d)–(f)) is partly caused by the stator potential effect not present in the upwash used for the predictions (see Section 3.2). This potential effect modiﬁes the phase of the excitation, as shown in [59], thus directly impacts the phase of the vane response.
Figs. 10(a) and (b) compare the loadings in the spanwise direction in the leading edge region (20 percent of chord). The levels match fairly well between the measurements and the predictions in terms of SPL. The phases are also in correct agreement, except for a constant shift existing between 0.5RT and the vane tip, again caused by the stator potential effect on the wake. The global shape of the measured phase, decreasing from hub to tip, indicates that the rotor wake interacts with the vane bottom part before the vane tip. At 85 percent of chord (Figs. 10(c) and (d)), the level of the predicted loading is 
well below the experimental data in the upper part of the vane, conﬁrming the previous observation related to the ﬂow separation on the vane suction side in the trailing edge region.
The vane loadings at 2 BPF are compared in Figs. 11 and 12. Similarly to the case at 1 BPF, the SPL values are higher in the leading edge region than in the rest of the chord, a behaviour correctly predicted by the model. The agreement between the experimental data and the 3D cascade response are very satisfactory at 0.74 and 0.91RT. The ﬂow separation is again visible in the SPL data in Figs. 11(b) and (c) from 70 percent of chord, but the level rises are less pronounced that at 1 BPF. The measured and analytical loading phases (Figs. 11(d)–(f)) are signiﬁcantly different, especially in the upper part of the vane where the large variation of the phases indicates a complex ﬂow behaviour not predicted by the model. Yet some of the phase shifts in the measurements are also questionable and suggest larger experimental uncertainties on the phase at this frequency. At 0.49RT (Fig. 11(a)), the 3D model under-predicts the loading by about 10 dB and the 2D model by a larger value. This is also visible in Fig. 12(a) representing the loading evolution in the spanwise direction. Sharp deﬁcit peaks appear in the analytical responses around 0.49RT and 0.83RT, whereas the measured and predicted vane loading compare fairly well on the rest of the vane height. Sudden phase changes are present at the same radial locations in Figs. 12(b) and (d). These analytical discontinuities originate from the coupling of the strip theory with a cascade response function, as already dis-cussed in [33,60] for instance. Indeed the variation of the rectilinear cascade geometry at each strip makes possible dif-fracted cascade acoustic modes and inter-vane channels modes to become cut-on at speciﬁc spanwise locations. Following a procedure similar to [48], it can be shown that the discontinuity at 0.49RT is caused by a cascade acoustic mode, generated by the interaction of the gust (q ¼ 2, kzc ¼ 0) with the cascade, becoming cut-on at this location. At 0.83RT, the inter-vane channel mode, created by a zero radial wavenumber gust, becomes cut-on at this position for 2 BPF and is responsible for the loading discontinuity. These two discontinuities, present over the whole chord, are also visible at 85 percent of chord in Fig. 12(c). Note that a cascade acoustic mode is also becoming cut-on near the vane tip in Fig. 10 explaining the differences between the 2D and 3D responses at this location. On the rest of the vane span, the predicted levels are lower than the experimental data, a feature again caused by the ﬂow separation taking place on a large part of the vane suction side. As previously noted, the experimental phase data present large uncertainties at this frequency limiting the comparisons in Figs. 12(b) and (d).
The comparisons performed in this section show that the differences between the 2D and the 3D cascade responses increase with the frequency of the excitation. Indeed, a single gust of zero radial wavenumber contributes to the 2D response, whereas the amount of skewed gusts contributing to the 3D response rises with the frequency. This 3D behaviour improves the modelling accuracy relatively to the actual interaction [48]. Moreover, the local discontinuities created by the coupling of the strip theory with a cascade response function are smaller with the 3D model than with the 2D model, leading to a more accurate prediction with the 3D model, e.g. in Figs. 11(a) and (c). Thus the analysis of the predicted unsteady vane loading with respect to wall pressure measurements allows reasonably validating the 3D cascade response function in an actual fan conﬁguration. The main discrepancies encountered in the comparisons have been explained, as they result from the measured upwash not accounting for the stator potential effect as well as a ﬂow separation region on the upper part of the vane suction side.
Using the measured aerodynamic data of Sutliff et al. [42], among which the upwash shown in Fig. 8, the cascade model detailed in Section 2 is applied to the whole set of conﬁgurations listed in Table 1. For a complete evaluation, both the 3D and the 2D version of the model, i.e. with the decomposition of Eq. (7), are considered. In this section, the sound power level (SWL) of Eq. (36) is presented for each harmonic of the BPF and for the upstream and downstream propagations. In Figs. 13– 16, these analytical predictions are compared with experimental power values obtained from the rotating rakes installed in the inlet and exhaust part of the duct (see Fig. 6) as well as with the predictions of the 2D cascade model V072 reported in [42].
In the stator conﬁguration with 13 vanes, only the duct mode (3,0) is excited and cut-on at 1 BPF (Table 1). For this case, Figs. 13(a) and (b) show an excellent agreement between the analytical predictions and the experimental values, for the upstream and downstream propagations respectively. Indeed the results of the model are within 2.4 dB from the measured values upstream. In Fig. 13(a) the 3D model predicts the power with a gap of 0.4 dB at 1800 RPM, the V072 value being at 0.7 dB. Downstream (Fig. 13(b)), the 3D model results vary between 1 and 1.8 dB with respect to the V072 predictions. For both upstream and downstream propagations, the experimental trend shows an increase of sound power with the rota-tional velocity, whereas all analytical predictions appear relatively ﬂat. The difference between upstream and downstream powers is more pronounced experimentally than with the predictions. At 2 BPF, the modes (- 7,0) and (6,0) propagate within the duct. The sum of their SWL is plotted upstream and downstream in Figs. 13(c) and (d) respectively. The present cascade model provides a relatively poor agreement with the V072 prediction, between 7 and 11 dB upstream and around 7 dB downstream. If the 3D model and V072 results present a similar trend with Ω, they both are far from the experimental trends. The latter show large and non-monotonic SWL variations with the rotor speed, that are partly explained in [42] as an acoustic reﬂection in the exhaust section where the rotating rake is mounted. It must also be mentioned that for all the comparisons performed in this section, the analytical results are obtained from an acoustic analogy in a constant section annular duct with RH=RT ¼ 0:375, whereas the measurements at the inlet and exhaust rotating rakes take place in sections with RH =RT ¼ 0 and 0.5 respectively. Thus reﬂections and standing waves may appear in the actual duct geometry thus explaining some differences with the analytical results.
In Figs. 14(a) and (b), corresponding to the stator with 14 vanes at 1 BPF, only the duct mode (2,0) is present. For both the upstream and downstream propagations, the 2D and 3D versions of the model are similar and very close to the V072 predictions (around 0.5 dB). The analytical results are in fair agreement with the experimental data upstream since the gap is about 2 dB, whereas this difference is larger downstream (between 7 and 8 dB). It is interesting to note that the predicted trend with Ω is now similar to the measured one. At 2 BPF, a single azimuthal mode is created, with two radial components (4,0) and (4,1). The upstream and downstream predictions given by the 3D model (triangles in Figs. 14(c) and (d)) are in correct agreement with the measured data since the differences are within 2 dB at 1700 and 1750 RPM and 3 dB at 1800 and 1850 RPM (except at 1850 RPM downstream where the experimental value shows an odd sharp drop). Therefore the 3D model provides better results upstream, and worse downstream, than the V072 code.
With the 26 vane stator, all the duct modes are cut-off at 1 BPF. Figs. 15(a) and (b) show the acoustic power at 2 BPF, corresponding to the single (6,0) mode. Again the evolution of the experimental data with the rotational speed is sig- niﬁcative, with an increase followed by a strong decrease of the levels upstream and by a slight decrease downstream. No acoustic model is able to predict this measured shape, partly inﬂuenced by the actual duct acoustic propagation as stated above. Moreover, according to [42], the main reason for this particular experimental trend was not deﬁnitely found, but could result from mode trapping and scattering. Only for this conﬁguration, it is remarkable to note that the 2D and 3D models clearly present opposite trends. Both provide results below the V072 predictions, between 7.5 and 0.5 dB upstream and around 5 dB downstream for the 3D model.
Again no duct mode is cut-on at 1 BPF in the 28 vane stator conﬁguration. At 2BPF, a single azimuthal mode with two radial components (4,0) and (4,1) propagates. For the upstream propagation (Fig. 16(a)), it is shown that the analytical predictions are similar since they are all comprised within 1 dB. They are very close to the measured power, at least for the available data. Downstream (Fig. 16(b)), the evaluated 3D model provides results closer to the experimental data than the other 2D models and under-predicts the measurements by 0.4–1.6 dB.
In summary the present comparisons of tonal acoustic powers have allowed the evaluation of the cascade model intro- duced in Section 2 relatively to measured data and analytical predictions of an existing code. As explained in Section 3.2, the V072 code and the 2D version of the model should be similar since they both use a 2D cascade response function coupled with an acoustic analogy within an annular duct. Figs. 14(a), (b) and Figs. 16(a), (b) indeed show very close results between these two codes. However in some cases, e.g. in Figs. 13(a), (b) and Figs. 14(c), (d), the 2D results present a similar trend but are separated by a shift. For the other cases, the 2D predictions are relatively different. From this analysis, it may be inferred that the input data used for V072 and the 2D models are not exactly equivalent, especially concerning the mean ﬂow values that are not provided in [42] and come from a more recent study [56]. Therefore, this shows that these acoustic models are particularly sensitive to the input data. As described in Section 2, the 3D cascade model has been designed to improve the fan noise prediction. In half of the studied cases, the 3D model provides better or equivalent (less than 1 dB difference) results than the V072 code relatively to the experimental data. Moreover, the cases where the 3D model gives worse than expected results correspond to the conﬁgurations for which the measured powers are highly inﬂuenced by a complex acoustic duct propa- gation not accounted for in the model (Figs. 13(c), (d) and Figs. 15(a), (b)). This phenomenon is related to the variations of the duct section [42]. Therefore, following the assessment of the 3D cascade response in Section 3.3, a reasonable validation of the 3D model is provided. It is shown to accurately predict tonal noise created by the rotor–stator interaction, in the limits of the assumptions that mainly consist of an acoustic propagation within a constant section annular duct and of the absence of the acoustic transmission and reﬂection through the fan. The inﬂuence of the stator potential effect on the rotor wake, seen in Section 3.3, must also be added to the sources of discrepancies with the measured acoustic powers. Moreover, except for one stator conﬁguration, the trend with the vane count and the rotational speed is predicted by the 3D model. It should also be emphasised that this is the ﬁrst detailed comparison of this analytical model for high-speed rotor–stator interaction noise with detailed source and noise measurements.
Following the validation of the tonal noise prediction model with an actual fan conﬁguration, an axial compressor stage setup is now chosen in order to illustrate the range of applications of this model. The CME2 low pressure research com- pressor (Laboratoire de Mecanique de Lille – Snecma Moteurs, France) is composed of a 30-blade rotor upstream of a 40-vane stator [44]. It is mounted in a convergent annular duct with a hub-to-tip ratio of RH=RT ¼ 0:77 at the leading edge of the stator vanes and an outer casing of 0.55 m constant diameter (Fig. 17). The vanes have a uniform aspect ratio of C=ðRT - RHÞ ¼ 1:25 and are stacked without any sweep nor lean angles. Their stagger angle varies from 17.5° at the hub to 12.5° at the tip. The solidity at midspan of the stator being CV =2πRT ¼ 2:01, cascade effects on the noise sources are expected to be signiﬁcant, thus justifying the use of the present acoustic model. The gap between the rotor and the stator varies from 17 percent at the hub to 29 percent of the vane chord at the tip. The rotational speed is 6300 RPM at nominal conditions, implying a BPF of 3150 Hz. At this operating point, the mass ﬂow rate is 11 kg s-1 and the total pressure ratio of the stage is 1.14. The compressor operates in a fully subsonic regime with a 0.33 axial Mach number at the inlet.
A detailed unsteady compressible ﬂow simulation of this conﬁguration has recently been performed and validated in [59] with available experimental data from [44]. The Navier–Stokes solver Turb'Flow, developed at Ecole Centrale de Lyon in France, was chosen for this simulation as it is speciﬁcally designed for turbomachinery applications. This solver is based on a ﬁnite volume formulation and solves the conservative equations on a multiblock structured grid [61]. This URANS wall- resolved simulation has been performed on one tenth of the compressor, the computational domain being composed of three rotor blades and four stator vanes. The ﬂowﬁeld is transferred from the rotating grid to the ﬁxed grid through an interface using a high-order Fourier decomposition and recomposition with adequate angular phase in the azimuthal direction. The conservative ﬂow variables are spatially discretised with the second-order Jameson centered scheme. Kok's k–ω turbulence model [62] is used along with a limiter for the production of turbulent kinetic energy. The time marching is performed with an explicit single-time-stepping method based on a second order Runge–Kutta scheme using up to ﬁve steps. As an illustration of the ﬂow topology, Fig. 18 presents an instantaneous axial Mach number ﬁeld at midpsan of the compressor. The boundary layers on both sides of the rotor blades merge at the trailing edges to form the wake. The latter are convected with the mean ﬂow and interact with the stator vanes.
This unsteady ﬂow simulation has two main purposes in this aeroacoustic context. On the one hand, it provides the aerodynamic excitation w for the model. As shown in [59], the upwash from a rotor–stator simulation has to be extracted as close as possible to the vane leading edge (around 1 percent of chord upstream of the vane) during a complete cycle, and averaged in the rotor reference frame, in order to account for the convection by the ﬂow and the stator blockage effects on the wake. This excitation is represented in Fig. 19 over a rotor blade passage. On the other hand, the unsteady wall pressure ﬂuctuations, partly corresponding to the tonal acoustic sources, can be recorded on every gridpoint of the vane surfaces. These data have been used in a CAA method developed in [48] that has allowed to perform preliminary assessments of the present acoustic model.
As stated in the introduction, the acoustic model is particularly suited to perform parametric studies on complex geo- metries, contrary to a CAA approach. Thus it perfectly meets the requirements of a pre-design tool in an industrial context. In order to demonstrate these features, a parametric study is performed on the CME2 compressor. From the original con- ﬁguration introduced in Section 4.1, the sweep and lean angles of the stator vanes are progressively modiﬁed. The inﬂuence of these geometrical variations can then be directly surveyed on the aerodynamic excitation, the acoustic sources and the acoustic power prediction.
The effect of swept stator vanes in rotor–stator tonal noise generation has been known from early studies, e.g. by Adamczyk [63] and Hayden et al. [64], since this geometrical modiﬁcation may lead to noise reduction with respect to radially stacked vanes. More recent works [33,65–67] give some physical insights into the mechanism related to this noise reduction. The rotor–stator interaction is highly dependent of the orientation of the rotor wakes with respect to the vanes leading edges. An increase of the rotor–stator spacing enhances the bending of the wakes by the mean ﬂow that is swirling within this gap. In order to obtain a similar wake–vane interactions for UHBR engines with short nacelles, that present a reduced fan-OGV spacing, swept and leaned stator vanes have to be introduced [66]. Sweeping the vanes in the backward direction, i.e. with φ^o0, reduces the mean ﬂow velocity component along the chord Uxc and extends the distance between the upstream rotor and the stator. Consequently the aerodynamic excitation is damped on the additional convection distance up to the vane leading edge, thus creating a lower vane response. Furthermore the main effect of sweeping stator vanes consists of large phase variations of the excitation along the vane leading edge direction. Therefore the vane submitted to this excitation also presents a signiﬁcant phase variation along the direction zc. This phase evolution from strips to strips leads to a lower inte- grated response on the vane compared to a radial vane because of possible cancellation of the source terms, thus to a reduction of the emitted tonal noise. Coupling sweep and lean angles of a vane can enhance the noise reduction efﬁciency.
Envia and Nallasamy [68] propose some guidelines for designing quieter stators: imposing backward sweep angles and lean angles in the rotational direction. These design rules were shown to be efﬁcient on an actual fan stage [69].
The ﬁrst surveyed parameter corresponds to the sweep angle of the CME2 stator vane. According to [68] and Fig. 3, φ^ has to be negative to obtain a tonal noise reduction with respect to the original stator geometry. Although the model is able to handle variable sweep angle along the duct height, it is chosen to keep this angle uniform in the present study for each case. The sweep angle varies between 0° and 30° with a 5° step, i.e. a typical range for modern compressors and fans [70]. The aerodynamic excitation, extracted in the original conﬁguration and represented in Fig. 19, has to be extrapolated until the leading edge plane of the swept stator for each case. This is performed using a linear extrapolation from the simulated ﬂowﬁeld in the inter-row gap, for each value of φ^. For instance, Fig. 20 represents the upwash velocity extrapolated until the leading edge plane of the stator swept with φ^ ¼ - 201. By comparisons with the upwash extracted on a radial plane in Fig. 19, it can be seen that the main sweep effects on the excitation consist of a decrease of the upwash amplitude, a more pronounced bending of the wake and a larger wake width. These effects are more signiﬁcant going from hub to tip since the leading edge plane is located at Δx ¼ ðrd - RHÞ tan jφ^ j in the axial direction from the radial plane. This additional distance is signiﬁcant since it corresponds to Δx 0:3 C at the tip for φ^ 201. It is particularly interesting to note the variation of the rotor wake shape with the orientation of the stator leading edge plane since this directly inﬂuences the wake–stator interaction as shown later. The bending of the wake seen by the swept vane tends to increase the amount of wake inter- sections per vane. This design objective has to be followed to ensure noise reduction according to [68].
For a quantitative analysis of the upwash evolution with the sweep angle, Fig. 21 presents the Fourier coefﬁcients (Eq. (8)) of the excitation for 1 and 2 BPF along the dimensionless coordinate. Concerning the amplitudes of these coefﬁcients, Figs. 21(a) and (c) clearly show the expected decrease of the excitation with the increase of the sweep angle (in absolute value). In this conﬁguration, it is observed that the decrease of the amplitudes is quasi-linear with the variation of φ^. This decrease is signiﬁcant since the amplitudes are globally divided by a factor of two for a 15° variation of the sweep angle. Figs. 21(b) and (d) show the phase of these coefﬁcients along z*c. As expected, the phase variations are increasing when going from φ^ ¼ 01 to φ^ ¼ -301. Again this feature is more signiﬁcant in the upper part of the duct than in the lower part.
Following the sweep effects on the aerodynamic excitation, the cascade response of the model (Section 2.4) is surveyed relatively to variations of φ^. Fig. 22 presents the cascade response along z*c, at 15 percent of chord from the leading edge, in terms of amplitudes. For 1 BPF, the behaviour of the response is similar to the one of the upwash, i.e. a quasi-linear decrease in amplitude with the increase of jφ^ j. The model is thus able to provide quantitative trends of the cascade response with the parametric variation of the sweep angle. For 2 BPF, increasing jφ^ j also leads to a decrease of the cascade response amplitude, nevertheless following a different pattern. Indeed, for the original vane (φ^ ¼ 01), the cascade response exhibits a sharp pressure peak at z*c ¼ 0:87. As already encountered in Section 3.3, this feature is caused by an inter-vane channel mode becoming cut-on at this location, upon the impingement of the gust with jpj ¼ 1 [48]. This phenomenon is directly linked to the local geometry of the equivalent rectilinear cascade and to the value of the incident velocity Uxc. By varying φ^, both the geometry and the mean ﬂow are changed. Therefore the cut-off frequencies of inter-vane channel modes are different for each sweep angle value. In Fig. 22(b), the pressure peak is indeed shifted towards the duct mid-height from φ^ ¼ 01 to, indicating that the corresponding inter-vane channel mode becomes cut-on at lower radii when increasing φ^.
This feature is coupled to a global decrease of the cascade response with the variation of the sweep angle, thus leading to the oscillatory shapes of the model response observed in Fig. 22(b).
Fig. 23 represents the phase of the cascade response over the vane surface for speciﬁc values of the sweep angle at 1 and 2 BPF. For the original vane geometry, the phase of the loading is quite radially uniform at 1 BPF, and already presents some radial variations at 2 BPF. For these two harmonics, the phase variations signiﬁcantly increase in the z* direction for larger values of φ^. This feature is caused by the phase variations of the excitation highlighted in Figs. 21(b) ancd (d). As a result, the cascade response is progressively decorrelated in the radial direction. This is known to be the main effect expected with swept stator vanes that leads to possible cancellations when the response is integrated over the vane [68].
The parametric study on the vane sweep angle is ﬁnally performed in terms of radiated sound power level (SWL) within the duct. Fig. 24 shows the values predicted by the model for each harmonic of the BPF previously investigated in terms of excitation and cascade response. The excited and radiated acoustic duct modes have been summed for each harmonic. As expected from the previous analysis, the predicted acoustic power globally decreases with an increase of jφ^ j. Indeed, the combined effects of reducing the amplitude of the upwash and decorrelating the excitation lead to lower values of the emitted sound power. This study emphasises the efﬁciency of swept vanes to provide a tonal noise reduction, since a value of 5 dB reduction can be expected on the acoustic power at 1 BPF for a 10° increase of the sweep angle. As shown in Fig. 24 (b), the slope is higher at 2 BPF for which a reduction of 10 dB can be found with a 10° increase of jφ^ j. The efﬁciency of acoustic power reduction thus increases with the tone harmonics. Overall the predicted evolution of acoustic power with the vane sweep angle, as well as the amount of sound reduction obtained, are in good agreement with reported results from tests or models [65,68,70]. The sweep angle variation similarly affects the upstream and the downstream radiations, as shown by the slopes in Figs. 24(a) and (b). However a non-monotonic behaviour of the acoustic power is found for high values of jφ^ j, as already encountered in [68] for instance. For 1 BPF, the acoustic power radiated downstream monotonically varies with the sweep angle, whereas this evolution is non-monotonic upstream. Thus the upstream propagation is more sensitive to the axial location of the sources than the downstream propagation, a feature already mentioned in [65]. Note that this parametric study has been performed in using an extrapolation to deﬁne a realistic rotor wake in function of the sweep angle. Within the limits of the error associated with this extrapolation, imposing the constraints of minimising the sound emission for each tone in each direction would lead to the optimal design of a stator composed of vanes with a 20° sweep angle.
Following the above parametric study on vane sweep angle only, the objective now consists of coupling lean and sweep angles. Indeed a proper combination of these design parameters may lead to an even more acoustically efﬁcient rotor–stator stage. According to Envia and Nallasamy [68], the lean angle ψ^ must be oriented in the rotational direction to provide a noise reduction, i.e. with a negative value here (see Fig. 4). Indeed with this conﬁguration, the amount of wake intersections per vane is increased. Due to this negative lean, the vane leading edge will see the rotor wake with a time delay. In other words, a phase shift is introduced in the upwash excitation to account for this delay, such as the upwash w extracted over an inclined plane becomes:
where rdψ^ represents the tangential distance at radius rd caused by the lean angle with respect to a straight vane [68].
Therefore the phase variation of the excitation is enhanced, and so should be the phase of the vane response. It can be thus expected to obtain lower values for the integrated vane loadings due to cancellations of the response caused by this highly varying phase response. In order to evaluate this effect on the CME2 compressor conﬁguration, the lean angle of the vanes varies between 0° and - 20°, for each of the swept stator conﬁguration already surveyed. For the sake of brevity, the upstream and downstream radiated acoustic powers are directly presented in Fig. 25.
Fig. 25 shows that, for each value of the lean angle, the evolution of the sound power with the sweep angle corresponds to a global decrease. For each case, the slopes of the curves are similar between each other and do not seem to depend on a speciﬁc lean value. At 2 BPF, Figs. 25(c) and (d) clearly show the expected inﬂuence of the lean angle. Indeed, for most of the sweep angle values, an increase of jψ^ j leads to a tonal noise reduction. This reduction is not linear, contrary to the sweep effect, and is of the order of 7 dB at 2BPF, for a 0–20° lean variation. Leaned vane alone is thus not a noise reduction mechanism as efﬁcient as swept vane, but the combination of both can lead to drastic reductions, e.g. 25–30 dB at 2 BPF, conﬁrming the results of previous studies [68]. A different trend is observed for the power predictions at 1 BPF in Figs. 25 (a) and (b). At this frequency, increasing the value of the lean angle does not necessarily lead to a power reduction, and may even increase the level of the acoustic emission. It means that the phase shifts brought by the swept and leaned geometry do not lead to the expected cancellations in terms of integrated vane loading, but rather to an increase of the sources. Indeed, similarly to sweep effect, the lean effect efﬁciency increases with the tone harmonics [68]. Therefore Figs. 25(a) and (a) show that the blade passing frequency of 3150 Hz seems too low for a positive power reduction in this conﬁguration. The efﬁcient stator design found in the sweep study, i.e. with φ^ ¼ -201, again appears to represent the optimal value for φ^ with variable lean angles. Indeed the conﬁguration with φ^ ¼ -201 and ψ^ ¼ -201 corresponds to the most efﬁcient design among the tested cases. At 1 BPF, this results in an almost equivalent design with respect to the swept stator only, with a slight increase of 2 dB upstream and an interesting reduction of 4 dB downstream. It is thus shown that, on this compressor, a parametric study focused on vane sweep only is able to provide the optimal value for φ^ of a combined swept and leaned vane design. Moreover the surveyed noise reduction mechanism highly depends on the harmonic since its efﬁciency increases with the frequency. Finally a clear trend in terms of noise reduction is found with the sweep angle whereas this trend appears more complex with the lean angle.
In this paper, a detailed description of an analytical model for tonal fan noise prediction has been performed. The physical mechanism of interest consists of the tonal noise generated by the rotor–stator interaction. Indeed it corresponds to one of the main noise contributions in current turbofan engines and its inﬂuence is expected to grow in future Ultra-High Bypass Ratio turbofan engines. The presented model has been designed to precisely account for complex stator vanes geometries, with variable stagger, sweep and lean angles along the duct height, as tonal noise is sensitive to these para- meters. A procedure has been proposed to use the rotor wake as the input excitation for the model. Namely, it is ﬁrst recommended to extract the upwash, from measurements or ﬂow simulations, in a surface matching the radial evolution of the vane leading edges, and second to decompose this excitation into three-dimensional skewed gusts. The acoustic sources are provided by a cascade response function used within a radial strip theory, so that the radial correlation characteristics of both the excitation and the response, typical for tonal noise, are considered. Moreover cascade effects occurring on noise generation and propagation for blade rows with overlapping elements are fully accounted for. Finally the sources are used as acoustic dipoles in an acoustic analogy tailored to an annular duct containing a uniform mean ﬂow. This ensures the radiated acoustic energy to be distributed on the actual cut-on and excited duct modes. In view of existing cascade models, the present model has been generalised to account for both rotational directions.
The proposed model has then been validated on an actual fan stage conﬁguration. It should be mentioned that this is the ﬁrst detailed comparison of this model with noise sources and far-ﬁeld measurements. The Advanced Noise Control Fan (ANCF), extensively tested at the NASA Glenn research center, is particularly suited for these comparisons. Indeed it is a low hub-to-tip ratio fan-OGV stage, with instrumented vanes (microphones) and duct (rotating rakes), installed in an anechoic environment. The data are available for several stator vane counts and several rotational velocities. Using an experimental dataset for the rotor wake, the cascade response of the model has ﬁrst been compared with unsteady pressure measure- ments on the instrumented vane surface. It has been found that the 3D version of the model provides a more accurate cascade response than the 2D model. These comparisons have led to a reasonable validation of the 3D response function, noting that two sources of discrepancies have been explained. On the one hand, a ﬂow separation in the upper part of the vane suction side enhances wall pressure ﬂuctuations, that cannot be predicted by the inviscid ﬂow model. On the other hand, the measured rotor wake used by the model does not account for the stator potential effect, whereas it inﬂuences the experimental vane response. The measured acoustic duct modes in the inlet and exhaust sections of the duct have then been compared with the results of the model in terms of acoustic power. Parametric studies with rotational velocities and vane counts have been performed, as well as comparisons with results from the V072 cascade model. In half of the studied cases, the proposed model has been shown to predict the radiated acoustic power with equivalent or more accuracy than the V072 model. For some other cases, the measurements have been highly inﬂuenced by a complex acoustic propagation within the duct, not accounted for in any of the models. The capability of the model to predict trends with vane counts and rotational velocities has been demonstrated on this conﬁguration.
This fan noise prediction model has been developed for research and industrial purposes. The model is thus expected to be included in an optimisation procedure aiming at designing quieter fan stages or more efﬁcient acoustic treatments. Thus it has to cope with parametric studies focused on the stator geometry. This feature has been demonstrated on the CME2 compressor stage. The excitation and mean ﬂow properties have been extracted from an existing detailed unsteady simulation of this rotor–stator conﬁguration to be input within the model. The parametric study has ﬁrst focused on the sweep angle of the vanes as results from the literature show this is an efﬁcient tonal noise reduction mean. Indeed swept vanes induce radial phase shifts in the excitation thus in the vane response, leading to lower integrated vane loadings. The model has correctly reproduced this behaviour, showing the expected trend in terms of vane loading evolution with the sweep angle (amplitude and phase). The model has also allowed predicting the acoustic power emitted by the stage in function of the vane sweep angle. An optimal design has been found with a - 20° sweep angle, yielding to a 10 dB reduction at 1 BPF and more than 15 dB reduction at 2 BPF with respect to a radially stacked stator. These values are within the range of what can be expected with this design. A two-parameter study has ﬁnally been performed concerning the vane sweep and lean angles. A proper orientation of the latter is indeed expected to enhance the noise reduction provided by the swept stator alone. This behaviour has been correctly reproduced by the model, showing that this noise reduction mechanism is highly dependent on the tone harmonics. A stator composed of vanes with a -20° sweep angle and a - 20° lean angle has been determined as the optimal acoustic design, bringing approximately an additional reduction of 7 dB with respect to the optimal swept design at 2 BPF.
Finally the proposed fan tonal noise model has been validated against experimental data and its pre-design tool char- acteristics have been demonstrated. Future research aiming at improving the accuracy of the prediction will mainly focus on the acoustic analogy used to radiate the acoustic sources.
The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Daniel L. Sutliff, from NASA Glenn Research Center, for having provided us with the geometry and the tests data of the Advanced Noise Control Fan (ANCF), and for his fruitful discussions, that have allowed to evaluate the fan tonal noise prediction model on a representative fan test case.
The result of the analytical derivation of the vane loading ΔP 0 xc, corresponding to the source term used in the tonal noise model presented in this paper, is recalled here. From the velocity potential scattered outside of the vane cascade, provided by Glegg [33], in response to the impinging gust:
Posson et al. [34] extended this work to the calculation of the potential inside the inter-vane channels as well as to the pressure jump across the vanes. For a proper use of the Wiener–Hopf resolution method [34], the cascade must be split into the three segments I, II (or II0 ) and III, represented in Fig. A1. Segment II is considered when d o C=2 (Fig. A1(a)) and segment II0 when d 4 C=2 (Fig. A1(b)). Segments I and III represent diffraction problems at the leading edge and at the trailing edge respectively, linking the inter-blade channels mode existing in II (or II0 ) with the radiated cascade modes (these modes are discussed in Section 3.3). The vane loading ΔPb0ðxcÞ reads, according to the considered segment:
All the new terms appearing in the expressions of the vane pressure jumps are deﬁned below. ρ0 is the mean ﬂow density. The variables introduced by Glegg [33] are:
It must be mentioned that the wavenumbers of the excitation and of the cascade response in the zc direction are the same (kzc ¼ k0zc) since the rectilinear ﬂat plate cascade has an inﬁnite span (Section 2.4). The function J þ and J - are deﬁned as:
The Fourier transform of the velocity potential across a vane is decomposed into the four terms:
