Abstract
The spatio-temporal evolution of a turbulent swirling jet undergoing vortex breakdown has been investigated. Experiments suggest the existence of a self-excited global mode having a single dominant frequency. This oscillatory mode is shown to be absolutely unstable and leads to a rotating counter-winding helical structure that  is located at the periphery of the recirculation zone. The resulting time-periodic 3D velocity ??eld is predicted theoretically as being the most unstable mode determined by parabolized stability analysis employing the mean ??ow data from experiments. The 3D oscillatory ??ow is constructed from uncorrelated 2D snapshots of particle image velocimetry data, using proper orthogonal decomposition, a phase-averaging technique and an azimuthal symmetry associated with helical structures. Stability- derived modes and empirically derived modes correspond remarkably well, yielding prototypical coherent structures that dominate the investigated ??ow region. The proposed method of constructing 3D time-periodic velocity ??elds from uncorrelated 2D data is applicable to a large class of turbulent shear ??ows.
Introductioan
Free and con??ned strongly swirling jets are of great interest due to their unique feature, commonly known as vortex breakdown. This phenomenon occurs when the ratio of the azimuthal to axial momentum exceeds a certain threshold, while both quantities have to be of the same order of magnitude. Breakdown in swirling jets is characterized by a transition of a jet-like axial velocity pro??le to a wake-like pro??le with a local minimum on the axis. This leads to a stagnation point to be followed by a highly turbulent region of reverse ??ow farther downstream. It can play a crucial role – from desired to detrimental – in a variety of technical applications. For example, vortex breakdown stabilizes the ??ame of a gas turbine combustor and enhances mixing, thus leading to a reduction of NOx emissions. On the other hand, bursting of leading- edge vortices adversely a??ects the lift distribution on delta wings resulting in poor ??ight performance. Understanding the cause of the vortex breakdown is therefore of great importance in order to develop appropriate control strategies. Furthermore, the transition of the ??ow from jet-like to wake-like that generates coexisting inner and outer shear layers and the concomitant axial and azimuthal shear makes this  ??ow complex and highly three-dimensional and thus poses a formidable challenge to fundamental studies. In the present work, we investigate coherent structures of a strongly swirling jet undergoing vortex breakdown. This study is based on experiments carried out at the TU Berlin. 3D time-periodic coherent structures are predicted by stability theory and are constructed from 2D particle image velocimetry (PIV) data via a proposed identi??cation method. In the introductory section we describe the main observed phenomena (§ 1.1), highlight the triple decomposition as the corner stone of our theoretical and experimental study of coherent structures (§ 1.2) and review current de??nitions of coherent structures in conjunction with stability analyses (§§ 1.3 and 1.4, respectively). Finally, an outline of the paper is provided (§ 1.5).
Vortex breakdown studies
 Several types of vortex breakdown have experimentally been observed. Lambourne  & Bryer (1962) were the ??rst to describe the axisymmetric and spiral type of vortex breakdown. Swirling jet experiments in pipes conducted by Sarpkaya (1971) and Faler & Leibovich (1978) identi??ed three di??erent types of vortex breakdown, namely the single helical, double helical and bubble-shaped vortex breakdown. Billant, Chomaz & Huerre (1998), investigating a swirling jet at a low Reynolds number, observed an additional conical-shaped breakdown type.Many researchers found helical disturbances that characterize strongly swirled jets, but their role in the dynamics of vortex breakdown is still a controversial issue. Some experts relate the onset of vortex breakdown to the hydrodynamic instability of vortical ??ow. Ludwieg (1961) assumes that the formation of a stagnation point results from the sensitivity of the vortex core to helical disturbances. Other researchers describe vortex breakdown as a transition of the ??ow from a supercritical to a subcritical state similar to a shock wave or a hydraulic jump. According to Escudier & Keller (1985) there is a clear separation of the roles of ??ow criticality and ??ow stability. It was proposed that the criticality of the ??ow determines the basic, wake-like character of the ??ow and that instability waves are a superimposed ??ne detail. Recent quantitative investigations could signi??cantly contribute to the understanding of the dynamics accompanying the onset of vortex breakdown. Time- resolved measurements conducted by Liang & Maxworthy (2005) indicate that a recirculation bubble with nearly axisymmetric shape accompanies the ??rst appearance of a stagnation point. It was further noticed that in the wake of this dividing streamline a single helical vortex arises near the jet center that ampli??es until it imposes its frequency onto the entire near ??eld. The authors suggest this to be a self- excited/globally unstable mode, supposably arising from a region of local absolute instability in the lee (downstream) of vortex breakdown. Forced experiments using vortex generators mounted on a rotating nozzle supported the absolute/convective nature of the dominating instabilities. Gallaire et al. (2006) performed a linear stability analysis based on numerical simulations of a swirling jet at Re = 200 that were conducted by Ruith et al. (2003). They found a convective to absolute instability transition in the lee of the recirculation bubble with a single helical mode being most unstable. Thus, it is likely that the precession of the vortex core and the appearance  of strong oscillations that have been observed in experiments and simulations (Ruith et al. 2003; Liang & Maxworthy 2005; Duwig & Fuchs 2007; Martinelli, Olivani  & Coghe 2007) can be attributed to a self-excited global mode initiated by ??ow instabilities in the region of vortex breakdown. 
Triple decomposition as a basis for structure extraction and prediction
Large-scale organized structures in turbulent ??ows were investigated for more than 40 years. For a comprehensive summary of earlier work, the reader is referred to Laufer (1975), Roshko (1977), Cantwell (1981) and Ho & Huerre (1984). A variety of de??nitions and techniques have been developed to reveal these so-called coherent structures. These include statistical approaches, pattern recognition methods, stability theory, conditional sampling and averaging and topological methods from dynamical system theory. Some of these methods are based on a triple decomposition introduced by Hussain & Reynolds (1970). Accordingly, turbulent ??ow may be decomposed into three constituents: mean (time- or ensemble-averaged), coherent (phase-averaged) and random (incoherent turbulent) motion. The triple decomposition method represents a re??nement of the classical Reynolds decomposition. It has become a conventional tool in active ??ow control (AFC) experiments that distil coherent disturbances by means of phase-locked averaging. Its application to experiments is easy when the coherent structure is tagged by external excitation where a simple synchronization of the data acquisition with the forcing signals is required. Without such external phase trigger, proper orthogonal decomposition (POD)-based techniques can provide another means for phase identi??cation (Depardon et al. 2007).The triple decomposition method has been implicitly used in a number of theoretical articles where the stability analysis was applied for turbulent ??ows (see, e.g. Crighton & Gaster 1976; Gaster, Kit & Wygnanski 1985). Liu (1989) has developed a local turbulence model for many shear ??ows utilizing the triple decomposition.
Empirical identi??cation of coherent structures
Large-scale coherent structures in many turbulent shear ??ows (see, e.g. Van Dyke 1975) are visually similar to predominant instability modes persisting over a wide range of Reynolds numbers. This similarity applies to ??ows whose mean velocity pro??les are inviscidly unstable and whose shape of these pro??les does not materially change during the transition from laminar to turbulent ??ow. This observation suggests that stability considerations can be applied to the mean turbulent ??ow ??eld, although there is no theoretical basis for this step. However, weakly nonlinear stability approaches explicitly assume that instability modes and most energetic (POD) modes are the same, at least near the onset of a supercritical Hopf bifurcation (Stuart 1958; Noack et al. 2003).Stability theory approximates the ??ow as a given mean ??ow and a superposition of space- and time-dependent modes. In similar spirit, turbulent coherent structures can be conceptualized as an expansion of modes. A corresponding least-order representation of a ??ow snapshot ensemble is obtained by the POD. This approach minimizes a time-averaged residual of the POD expansion for a given number of modes, and it is equipped with further useful analytical properties (Lumley 1967; Holmes, Lumley & Berkooz 1998). Historically, Lumley (1967) introduced POD as aleast-biased de??nition of coherent structures following up on the analytical approach by Townsend (1956) and the well-known Karhunen–Loe??ve decomposition from the 1940s.Meanwhile, many other empirical expansions of ??ow snapshots have been proposed serving dynamical systems or control theory goals. For instance, the dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) extracts modes from snapshots that are more related to stability eigenmodes (Rowley et al. 2009; Schmid 2010). Furthermore, the balanced POD serves as economic expansion for linear input–output relationships (Rowley 2005). The present study is restricted to the classical POD since it targets an optimal kinematical representation of the ??ow.
Linear stability analysis of swirling jets
Linear stability analysis is presently used to describe the large-scale oscillations observed in this experiment. In principle, self-excited oscillations are known to arise from a region of absolutely unstable ??ow. They can be described by an unstable global mode (Chomaz 2005) or by local spatio-temporal stability analysis with complex frequency and wavenumber (Huerre & Monkewitz 1990; Monkewitz, Huerre & Chomaz 1993; Pier & Huerre 2001). However, for the underlying ??ow con??guration, we employ a simple local spatial stability analysis to approximate the velocity of the global mode. This simpli??cation serves the main purpose of this study, which is to enhance the understanding of turbulent coherent structures in highly turbulent swirling ??ows. It is in line with similar studies summarized by Liu (1989), and it is rooted by experimental observations (Oberleithner et al. 2009). Strong oscillations at the global frequency were found upstream of vortex breakdown, revealing a precessing vortex core that acts as the global wavemaker. In the outer shear layer, downstream travelling instabilities were detected that were internally forced by the wavemaker and were synchronized to its frequency. These waves served as ampli??ers to external forcing, which suggests that the signalling problem is valid for the outer ??ow region. Assuming that the outer shear layer responds to internal forcing in the same way as to external forcing, we may approximate the large-scale ??uctuations downstream of the wavemaker by convectively unstable modes that oscillate at the global frequency. Hence, the spatial analysis presented here was conducted with an unknown complex streamwise wavenumber and the known real global frequency.
Experimental arrangement 
The swirling jet facility
A turbulent swirling free jet was generated using an apparatus that resembles the one built by Chigier & Chervinsky (1965). The schematic arrangement of the facility is shown in ??gure 1. The primary axial stream of air passes through a deep honeycomb prior to entering a swirler through which a secondary air stream is introduced through four tangential slots, each 80 mm long. The ??ow is then guided through a 600 mm long tube, before entering the contraction forming the nozzle. A perforated plate is mounted in the tube to minimize possible inhomogeneities resulting from the tangential inlets in the swirl chamber. The swirl levels generated by the facility depend on the ratio of mass ??ows coming through the two inlets: a non-swirling jet is generated when no air enters tangentially through the swirler and the maximum swirl level is attained when the axial in??ow is zero. Two frequency-controlled blowers provide the necessary air??ow. The volume ??ux of each blower was monitored and controlled by calibrated ori??ces. The nozzle diameter is D = 51 mm. Particular attention was paid to the design of the excitation device located at the nozzle lip where the thin shear layer between the jet and the quiescent surrounding ??uid is unstable to all azimuthal modes (Cohen & Wygnanski 1987; Gallaire, Rott & Chomaz 2004). Acoustic excitation was applied using an array of eight loudspeakers equally spaced along the azimuth (??gure 1). Such an array provides radial ??uctuations that trigger the inviscid shear layer instabilities. An acoustic wave-guide from each actuator terminates in a rectangular duct leading to a narrow slot that does not interfere with the jet ??ow when the speakers are inactive. The loudspeakers are driven by a set of digital-to-analogue converters under program control. The actuators are adjusted to equal amplitudes under no-??ow conditions using a microphone located at the centerline in the exit plane of the nozzle. The azimuthal disturbances can be controlled by varying the phase di??erence between the actuators. With an array of eight actuators the highest azimuthal mode numbers that can be excited are m = ±4.
Data acquisition
Stereoscopic particle image velocimetry (Stereo-PIV) was used to measure the ??ow ??eld. It consists of velocity measurements of particles going through a laser sheet generated by a double-pulsed Nd:Yag laser at 532 nm and 25 mJ in 5 ns burst. TwoCCD cameras with a resolution of 1.3 million pixels were used. Both cameras were positioned at a 45?? angle in order to measure all three velocity components in a 2D plane. The cameras and the laser were mounted onto a single traversing system. Data were taken in the cross??ow plane as well as in the axial plane. Each ensemble of PIV snapshots consisted of 800 events captured at approximately 3 Hz.
Coordinate systems
The orientation of the two coordinate systems used in the present work is shown in ??gure 1. Cylindrical coordinates are used to describe the ??ow quantities in the cross??ow plane, whereas Cartesian coordinates are used for data shown in the streamwise plane. The two coordinate systems are necessary, as the latter does not cause a singularity along the jet axis. On the other hand, in the cross??ow plane, cylindrical velocity components are necessary to correctly describe the ??ow quantities of the axisymmetric ??ow. Furthermore, the normal mode decomposition, necessary for the linear stability analysis, is strictly based on an axisymmetric ??ow given in cylindrical coordinates. In order to compare theoretical results with experimental data, we will switch between the two coordinate systems.
Characteristic numbers
Two independent dimensionless numbers characterize the global behaviour of the ??ow:The Reynolds number ReD is based on the nozzle diameter D and the average axial velocity U which is derived from the mean mass ??ow rate Q. The swirl number   S is the commonly used parameter that quanti??es the amount of swirl (Chigier &Chervinsky 1965; Panda & McLaughlin 1994). It is de??ned as the ratio between the axial ??ux of angular momentum G˙θ  and the axial ??ux of axial momentum G˙x . According to the conservation of momentum, the swirl number is conserved in theaxial direction (Rajaratnam 1976).
Flow phenomenology
This paper focuses on the near ??eld of a turbulent jet at a very high rate of swirl. The basic features of this ??ow are described in the following section in order to explain the motivation for investigating the evolution of the coherent structures.
Mean ??ow properties
Figure 2 illustrates the streamwise distribution of the time-averaged ??ow. Due to the occurrence of vortex breakdown, the maximum axial velocity is displaced from the jet center. The axial velocity pro??les have a local velocity minimum in the inner region of the jet. Thus, a wake with a region of reversed ??ow on and near the jet axis resembles with a recirculation bubble that is bound by upstream and downstream stagnation points. This reversed ??ow region is similar to the one created by an obstacle placed on the jet center. Hence, the ??ow emanating from the nozzle is a swirling ring-jet with an FIGURE 2. Pro??les of the time-averaged axial and plane-normal velocity at various axial locations; velocities are normalized by the bulk velocity U ; streamlines indicate the location of the recirculation bubble (ReD = 20 000; S = 1.22).inner and an outer axial and azimuthal shear layer. The streamlines shown in ??gure 2 illustrate how the ??ow is guided around the recirculation zone causing a rapid increase of the jet diameter. Downstream the recirculation zone, at approximately x/D > 1.4, the inner shear layers begin to merge and the axial velocity on the jet center increases gradually with increasing downstream distance. The azimuthal velocity pro??les may be divided into a vortex core, the region between the jet center and the maximum azimuthal velocity, and the outer azimuthal shear layer located between the maximum azimuthal velocity and the quiescent surrounding ??uid. The axial velocity pro??le has two in??ection points, and thus, in terms of inviscid hydrodynamic stability they possess as many plane instability modes. Since the ??ow is axisymmetric, these could combine with azimuthal modes. The convex streamlines over the frontal part of the recirculation bubble coupled with the decelerating outer ??ow provide the necessary conditions for centrifugal instability, as do the concave streamlines in the lee of the bubble coupling with the inner shear layer.
Self-excited oscillations
Former experimental investigations by Liang & Maxworthy (2005) and numerical simulations of Ruith et al. (2003) revealed that the onset of vortex breakdown is accompanied by energetic large-scale ??uctuations. In the present investigation, these strong oscillations had a distinct frequency (??gure 3). By traversing a hot-wire probe involtage ??uctuations at(x/D, y/D)= (0.57, 0.38) for the unforced swirling jet. The same dominant frequency Stnat was measured in the inner and outer axial shear layers. The Strouhal number is de??ned as St = f D/U .radial and axial directions, a constant dominant frequency was observed throughout the region of interest, with highest amplitudes occurring in the inner and outer axial shear layers. As will be shown later, the spectral peak at Stnat = 0.49 corresponds to the precession of the vortex core or, in terms of hydrodynamic stability, to the appearance of a strong helical instability with azimuthal wavenumber m = 1. This relatively sharp peak is attributed to a self-excited global mode with its origin being located on the jet centerline in the region of reversed ??ow (Ruith et al. 2003; Liang & Maxworthy 2005; Gallaire et al. 2006). There are several experimental techniques to con??rm that the ??ow has transitioned to a global mode via a supercritical Hopf bifurcation. According to Huerre & Monkewitz (1990), near critical conditions, the amplitude of the global mode A is governed by the forced Landau equation (Landau & Lifshitz 1959)where c1 is the temporal ampli??cation rate during the time of exponential growth and f is proportional to the external forcing amplitude. In the absence of forcing, the limit cycle amplitude should increase proportionally to the deviation from a control parameter, where Scrit is the critical control parameter for a constant Reynolds number and S Scrit . The amplitude of the global mode was measured with a calibrated hot wire placed in the center of the inner axial shear layer at (x/D, y/D)= (0.57, 0.38). At this radial location the oscillations reach their maximum amplitude. A single-wire probe was used with the wire aligned parallel to the azimuthal velocity. The signal was Fourier transformed and the amplitude at the dominant frequency was derived. Figure 4 shows the growth of the global amplitude with increasing swirl while keeping the Reynolds number constant. Evidently, the saturation amplitude is proportional to S Scrit . The linear dependence suggests that the oscillation is of the supercritical Hopf bifurcation type. The critical swirl number was found to be Scrit = 0.88.A second experimental technique that may con??rm the existence of a self-excited global mode is to investigate the lock-in characteristic. According to Provansal, Mathis & Boyer (1987), Sreenivasan, Raghu & Kyle (1989) and Juniper, Li & Nichols (2009), the critical forcing amplitude at which the frequency of the natural mode Stnat locks onto the forcing frequency Stf should linearly depend on Stnat Stf . The lock-in region is de??ned as the forcing amplitude at which the spectral peak of the natural mode disappears and the spectrum peaks at the forcing frequency. Measurements conducted with a single hot wire, placed on the center of the inner axial shear layer at (x/D, y/D)= (0.57, 0.38), revealed that the critical lock-in amplitude is proportional to Stnat Stf (??gure 5). This provided additional evidence for the existence of a supercritical Hopf bifurcation needed to establish a global mode.Concluding this section, the base ??ow under investigation is a swirling ring-jet whose conical boundaries originate at the ori??ce due to a recirculation zone located on the jet axis. The axial and azimuthal shear layers coexist in the outer region of  the jet and in the jet core. The swirl number considered presently is above the critical value at which a supercritical Hopf bifurcation takes place. Thus, the strong coherent ??uctuations that are dominating the entire ??ow ??eld near the nozzle are attributed to the existence of a self-excited global mode.
Extraction of coherent structures
Two approaches are outlined in this section in order to extract the coherent structures from overall turbulence. In 4.1, the theoretical considerations and numerical implementation of the linear stability analysis are described. In 4.2, the empirical extraction of coherent structures by means of the POD is introduced. Moreover, it is proposed how to reconstruct the three-dimensional shape of the structure from two-dimensional empirical data. The results of the presented methods are compared in the subsequent section. For the following considerations, we decompose all ??ow variables into three parts (Hussain & Reynolds 1970): steady mean ??ow, coherent component and stochastic ??uctuations:with the phase-averaged velocity vp = V (x)+vc(x,t). Table 1 summarizes the symbols used to distinguish between the di??erent parts of the velocity components in their corresponding coordinate systems.
Theoretical approach based on the linear stability analysis
We shall assume that the mean ??ow is known and introduce its analytical approximation followed by an outline of the theoretical considerations and the numerical procedures used in the linear stability analysis.Analytic representation of the time-averaged ??owThe incompressible mean ??ow of the uncon??ned swirling jet is expressed by an axial velocity Vx and a circumferential velocity Vθ . The radial velocity is neglected. The characteristic velocity scale V = Vx,max is de??ned as the maximum axial velocity at a certain axial location, and the characteristic length scale R = rx,max is represented by the radial distance of the maximum velocity. The ‘Monkewitz pro??le’ approximatesthe axial component if we normalize all velocities by V and all lengths by R. In the current study, we employ a modi??cation of this pro??le introduced by Michalke (1999):Vx = 4BF1[1 ?? BF2], (4.2a)where F1 and F2 are given by Monkewitz & Sohn (1988) asThe quantity B depends on the axial velocity on the jet centerline Vcl:N1,2 1 are the shape parameters that control the thickness of the jet shear layers.  In contrast to Michalke (1999), we use two parameters N1 and N2 in order to approximate the inner and outer shear layer, respectively. The normalized swirl component is represented by the same equations with the simpli??cation that B = 1. Therefore, the local swirl parameter Sloc = Vθ,max /Vx,max is introduced yielding Note that all ??ow parameters and ??tting parameters of (4.2)–(4.3) vary in the axial direction due to the non-parallelism of the mean ??ow. Their quantities are displayed in tables 2 and 3 for pro??les taken at x/D = [0.25; 0.5; 1; 1.5]. The ??tted velocity pro??les are displayed in ??gure 6 together with the measured mean axial and azimuthal velocities for distances in the range. Both velocity components are well represented by the suggested approximation. Note that this rather complex mean ??ow approximation is necessary to accurately represent the two axial and azimuthal shear layers. Simpler models as introduced by Michalke (1999) and Gallaire, Chomaz & Huerre (2004) did not approximate the underlying mean ??ow well enough for an accurate linear stability analysis.
Eigenvalue problem
To analyse the linear stability at a given axial location of the mean ??ow, velocity and pressure disturbances are superposed onto the corresponding mean These perturbations are decomposed in the classical form where H , F , G and P are the eigenfunctions, α = αr + iαi is the complex axial wavenumber, m is the integer azimuthal wavenumber and ω = ωr + iωi is the complex angular frequency. Upon substituting the modal decomposition (4.4) into the Navier– Stokes equations, linearized about the prescribed mean ??ow (4.2)–(4.3), we obtain the linear system of ordinary di??erential equations for continuity where the primes denote d/dr. For the free jet, the boundary conditions in the far ??eld area and in the limit along the centerline (r = 0) imposeFor a given mean velocity pro??le, the system (4.5)–(4.7) describes an eigenvalue problem. A non-zero solution of (F, G, H, P ) exists if and only if the complex pair (α, ω) satis??es the dispersion relation (α, ω, m, Γ, Re) = 0. The symbol Γ represents all control parameters describing the mean velocity pro??les. In the present work, the linear stability analysis is performed to derive the spatial modes that are retrieved by phase-averaged measurements. Thus, the focus is on the viscous spatial stability analysis where the spatial branches α(ω, Γ ) are obtained by solving for complex axial wavenumbers when ω and m are real. The non-parallelism of the mean ??ow requires to solve the eigenvalue problem (4.5)–(4.7) at each axial location. The slowly varying amplitudes are expressed by the local eigenmodes. The full solution is then constructed by using the eigenfunctions that depend on x and The Reynolds number in (4.5) is based on the characteristic length and velocity scale Re = RV/ν and is also varying with x. The ??ow will be considered as unstable when the disturbance grows with x, i.e. when the imaginary part of the eigenvalue αi is negative. The existence of saddle points in the complex α plane, which serve as an indicator for absolute instability, will not be investigated.
Numerical method
Khorrami, Malik & Ash (1989) demonstrated that the eigenvalue problem can be e??ciently solved by using a Chebyshev spectral collocation method. Following this study, the system of ordinary di??erential equations (4.5) is solved numerically by discretizing the three velocity components and the three momentum equations at the Chebyshev collocation points. The continuity equation is enforced at the mid grid points. This approach has been successively applied by Khorrami (1991) to the temporal problem and recently to the spatial problem by Parras & Fernandez-Feria (2007). For a detailed description of the numerical procedure, the reader is referred to Khorrami et al. (1989); thus, only a brief summary is given here.The boundary conditions (4.6) are enforced at a large but ??nite radius rmax 1as was done by Olendraru & Sellier (2002) and Parras & Fernandez-Feria (2007). A coordinate transformation is necessary to map the Chebyshev collocation points, in the interval  1 .onto the physical domain of the problem, in the range 0 “ r “ rmax . Here, the two-parameter transformation proposed by Malik, Zang & Hussaini (1985) is used, which readSince the Chebyshev collocation points are known to be distributed in the vicinity of r =0 and rmax, the parameter rc is necessary to redistribute the collocation points. It allows half of the points to be distributed in the region.Finally, the eigenvalue problem (4.5) for the case of spatial stability (given real ω, complex eigenvalue α) is linearized by introducing a generalized eigenvector X = [F, G, H, αF, αG, αH, P ]T. Discretizing the system of ordinary di??erential equations (4.5) in terms of the variable ξ and enforcing the boundary conditions (4.6)–(4.7), we may write the generalized eigenvalue problem as Taking Z as the number of Chebyshev points, both D and E are square matrices with dimensions of 7Z. Note that the last 14 rows of matrix D contain the boundary conditions. The eigenvalue problem (4.9) is solved using a standard EIG routine embedded in the software environment MATLABTM. Spurious eigenmodes, caused by the discretization, are discarded by two independent criteria: ??rst, all eigenmodes are discarded that do not diminish at r , that is to say that we consider only those eigenvalues satisfying with ri being the radial points and a given tolerance. Second, spurious eigenvalues are ??ltered out by comparing the computed spectra Z an for Z± > Z. The location of the spurious modes in the complex α-plane is very sensitive to the number of Chebyshev points Z, in contrast to the few physical eigenvalues of the problem. Thus, the eigenvalues α are considered as spurious if min α α± > ??2.The accuracy of our calculations is ??rst checked by comparing the compute deigenvalues with those calculated by Khorrami et al. (1989) and Parras & Fernandez- Feria (2007). Our computed eigenvalues agree for all shown digits which is not surprising as these authors use exactly the same numerical method. A comparison of our computations with the results presented by Gallaire & Chomaz (2003) is more challenging as their results are retrieved by direct numerical simulations of the linear impulse response. Unfortunately, Gallaire & Chomaz do not explicitly present computed eigenvalues of their spatio-temporal analysis but only display the complex frequency ω of the temporal problem. Hence, for the sake of comparison, we computed the temporal modes using the same base ??ow as used by Gallaire & Chomaz. Figure 7 clearly shows that for m = 1 both numerical methods arrive at the same solutions. The correctness of the computed eigenvalues makes us con??dent to apply the computations to our base ??ow. In comparison to the base ??ow used by Gallaire & Chomaz and Parras & Fernandez-Feria, our mean ??ow is more complex as it consists of two axial and two azimuthal shear layers. Furthermore, the Reynolds number is in the range of 3000 Re 8000, i.e. one order of magnitude higher than that used by Gallaire & Chomaz. Thus, from the numerical point of view the problem is more demanding and the number of collocation points has to be increased. To satisfy the ??lter criterion (4.10) and to successfully discard the spurious eigenvalues, the number of Chebyshev points is increased to Z = 300. A convergence study optimizes the parameters a and rmax of the transformation (4.8) yielding a =3 and rmax = 100 for all computations presented here. It was observed that the calculated eigenvalues are relatively insensitive to the radial distribution of the collocation points.A further challenging aspect of the computation of spatial instability is the sorting of the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions with respect to the corresponding modes. Spatial branches have to be identi??ed and tracked in the complex wavenumber plane while  a parameter of the dispersion relation is changed. A well-designed sorting routine is of great importance to accurately follow the spatial branches into the region of negative growth αi > 0. In this region, many modes coexist and several spatial branches intersect. We developed a routine which sorts the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions ofthe dispersion relations and ± by incorporating two criteria: ??rst, eigenvalues are sorted by minimizing the distance α α± ; second, the normalized eigenvectors X are sorted by minimizing 1  XX± . The e??ciency of the sorting routine was validated by visually checking the spatial branches.Empirical approach based on the PODIn this section, we outline the path from the POD of 2D PIV data to the construction of full 3D time-dependent velocity ??eld.Proper orthogonal decompositionWe consider the ??uctuation snapshots of a velocity ??eldwhere x is a point in a spatial domain ?? ??3, and tk, k = 1,...,N, are the sampling instants. The goal is to ??nd a least-order expansion of the snapshotswhich minimizes the residual vres in a sense speci??ed below. The snapshots are considered as elements of the Hilbert space of square integrable vector ??elds 2(??). This Hilbert space is equipped with the inner product in ?? between two vector ??elds v and w de??ned byand the related norm ??v???? readsThe velocity ??elds are provided by PIV snapshots taken at N uncorrelated points at the times tk, k = 1,...,N. In addition to the inner product in space, we de??ne the ensemble average of a quantity ζ asThe quantity ζ may be a scalar, a vector or any other tensor. The norm and ensemble average allows one to formulate an optimal property of the Galerkin expansion (4.12). We require that the spatial modes are chosen such that the time-averaged 2 error is minimal for the number of modes I = 1,...,N :Note that the minimized residual vres 0 for I = N . This optimality property is ful??lled by the snapshot POD modes introduced by Sirovich (1987). The corresponding algorithm is based on the N × N autocorrelation matrix R = (Rkl) de??ned byquantifying the relation between the snapshots. The correlation matrix is symmetric and positive semi-de??nite, i.e. the eigenvalue problemhas real and non-negative eigenvalues λp “ 0. Without loss of generality, we assume the eigenvalues to be sorted by magnitude:Note that λN =0 since N linearly independent snapshots cannot span the whole  N -dimensional space. Two points, for instance, de??ne a one-dimensional line. The corresponding eigenvectors ap : = [ap(t1),..., ap(tN )]T, called temporal modes, are orthogonal by construction. For reasons of convenience, we requireNow, the spatial POD modes can be calculated as a linear combination of the ??uctuation snapshotsThese spatial POD modes are orthonormal by construction:The eigenvalues λp represent twice the amount of the ??uctuating kinetic energy contained in each POD mode, The total ??uctuation energyK is generally referred to as turbulent kinetic energy (TKE). Snapshot POD extracts the most energetic structures representing them as linear combinations of the snapshots and imposes orthogonality in spatial and temporal modes. Snapshot POD is the time-discrete variant of a general continuous formulation (Holmes et al. 1998). In turbulent ??ows, the large-scale structures usually contain a major portion of the TKE, so the POD modes with high energy content can hence be expected to span the basis for the dominant coherent structures.Spatial and temporal POD modesThe snapshot POD, as described above, is applied to the data taken in the cross??ow and streamwise planes of measurement. Both sets of measurement consist of 800 snapshots. The observation domains have a spatial extent of 1.1 < y/D < 1.1 and 1.1 < z/D < 1.1 at x/D = 0.57 for the cross??ow plane and 0.25 < x/D < 3 and1.1 < y/D < 1.1 at z/D = 0 for the streamwise plane. The eigenvalue spectrum of POD modes for both measurement planes is shown in ??gure 8.For both cases the POD shows that the ??rst two eigenvalues contain substantial amount of energy. In the cross??ow plane the ??rst two modes contain already 30 % of TKE, while in the streamwise plane these modes contain more than 14 %. In both cases, the energy contained in the two leading modes is nearly equal suggesting that the two modes span a travelling wave.In the cross??ow plane of measurement, the ??rst and second spatial POD modes resemble one another as do the fourth and ??fth modes (??gure 9). The ??rst pair of modes describes an azimuthal wave represented by two modes having a π/2 phase shift. The second pair having twice the azimuthal wavenumber has a π/4 shift between them with respect to the dominant harmonics. The ??rst pair represents a travelling azimuthal wave with wavenumber m = 1, and the second pair indicates a travelling azimuthal wave m = 2.To elucidate the temporal behavior of the identi??ed structures, the phase portraits of the corresponding temporal amplitudes ap are investigated. Considering the phase portrait of a1 and a2 (??gure 10), it is clearly seen that the modes describe an oscillating process. In addition, the comparison of a1 and a4 reveals that the second mode-pair is the second harmonics with respect to the ??rst one, as indicated by the eight-like form of the Lissajous ??gure. Both mode pairs describe rotating structures that rotate with the same revolution time with azimuthal wavenumber m = 1 for the ??rst and second modes and with m = 2 for the fourth and ??fth modes. The third mode describes an axisymmetric ??uctuation of the ??ow, which is not correlated with the identi??ed harmonic structures (??gure 10). This mode is related to the axial ??uctuation of the location of vortex breakdown.Figure 11 displays the POD modes of the streamwise cross-section. Again, the  ??rst two modes have the same azimuthal wavenumber and frequency. These similar modes are axially shifted by a quarter wavelength. They describe coherent structures that are ??rst growing and then decaying in the streamwise direction. The temporal representation of the ??rst two streamwise modes corroborates an oscillating process (??gure 12). The ??rst two modes in both cross??ow and streamwise planes of measurement describe a harmonically ??uctuating structure that the spectral analysis (??gure 3) picked up as containing one fundamental frequency. Consequently one may assume that both modes are tied to the same oscillatory structure. Linking theWe note that the relative levels of the ??rst mode-pair with respect to its TKE content are unequal for crosswise and streamwise observation planes. This is due to the dominant structure governing only half of the analysed streamwise measurement domain. Hence, the energy content with respect to the entire streamwise plane isapproximately half as high in comparison to the crosswise plane. Using an appropriate sub-domain for streamwise POD analysis can decrease this di??erence.The third and forth streamwise modes (??gure 11) are coupled and represent the meandering of the recirculation bubble. The phase portrait reveals no relation to the dominant structure. Hence, the meandering is a??ected by other processes.In conclusion, the periodically ??uctuating global mode is represented by the ??rst two POD modes in both measurement planes. This harmonic process is indicated by the phase portraits. It is possible to extract the phase information of the dominant coherent structure by identifying the corresponding POD modes. It is then a straightforward procedure to use the temporal amplitudes of these POD modes to obtain the phase angle ??k for each snapshot k, yieldingThis phase angle corresponds to the phase position of a snapshot with respect to the dominant structure, in the manner that the optimal amount of kinetic energy of each snapshot is represented by these modes. Hence, it is possible to de??ne a ??ow phase via the POD. In the following this de??nition of phase is used to extract the coherent structures.Linking the POD modes to the coherent velocityFirst, we de??ne the coherent velocity vc. Holmes et al. (1998) recommend to identify and exploit symmetries in experimental data. This additional ??lter reduces the complexity of the POD and yields a better understanding of the underlying process. For an axisymmetric swirling jet, the azimuthal direction θ can be regarded as a homogeneous direction, as it is also assumed for linear stability analysis. This direction can be represented through Fourier modes with respect to the azimuthal wavenumber m = 1. The triple decomposition assumes the coherent component as being a phase-dependent average of a harmonic signal with temporal period T . Hence, the time can also be regarded as a homogeneous direction and can be decomposed by a Fourier representation according to the phase information ??k of  the POD (4.24). With these simpli??cations, the coherent velocity readswhere m indicates the azimuthal wavenumber, n is a multiple of the fundamental frequency ω = 2πf  and Fmn(x, r) is a complex-valued vector ??eld containing the radial and axial dependence of the coherent component. The Fourier modes Fmn are obtained through a Fourier transform of the ??uctuating part of the velocity v±:As described in the previous section, the POD relates each snapshot to a phase angle of the dominant ??uctuations. Thus, the Fourier modes Fmn are obtained for a discrete time (according to ??k) and continuous space Fourier transform:??πThis is valid only if the phase angles ??k are equally distributed in [0, 2π]. The phase angles obtained from the POD ful??l this condition, so these angles correspond to a oscillation with uniform frequency ??k = ωtk.The assumed rotational symmetry is examined for the cross??ow measurement plane of the vector ??eld. If we omit the assumption of homogeneity in θ of (4.25), then the complex coherent component is given byThis equals the de??nition of POD modes (4.21) provided the ??rst two POD modes i??k are considered in a complex representation with ^ak e= a1(tk)+ia2(tk), except that the amplitude ak of the temporal modes is neglected. We assume the amplitude variations to be caused by turbulent noise, which is indicated by the phase portrait in ??gure 13 (see also Depardon et al. 2007). In consequence, the spatial POD modes are similar to the coherent component, in detail Φ1 + iΦ2 F1 (with Fn as in (4.28)). In ??gure 13, the coherent component vc in the crosswise measurement plane is compared between the simple phase-average derived from crosswise data vc = Re F1(r, θ ) and the phase-average constructed from streamwise data assuming azimuthal symmetry vc = Re F11(r) eiθ . The contour plots of vc are very similar proving that the assumed symmetry is legitimate. The discrepancy between the two plots is attributed to an insu??cient number of snapshots for more precise averaging. It should be noted that the triple decomposition, as outlined in this section, is not limited to the use of POD. The phase information of oscillatory ??uctuations is often inferred in three di??erent ways. First, if the ??ow is externally actuated, the phase information can be directly derived from the actuation signal. Second, it is possible to obtain the required phase information from a time-resolved point measurement (e.g. hot wire), using a bandpass ??lter and a Hilbert transformation. Third, it is provided by a statistical approach such as the POD described above. In the present investigation, the POD was chosen because it has some advantages with respect to the other techniques which will be shortly depicted.Most ??ow oscillations do not occur at a prescribed frequency, as there is always jitter. Filtering with respect to a ??xed frequency will ignore large portions of the ??ow a??ected by frequency modulation, reappearing in vs. With a locally adjusted frequency, we reduce the amount of TKE captured by vs, while vc lumps a narrow frequency band into a single frequency. In the case of a phase average, triggered by external forcing, no phase jitter is incorporated at all. If a time-resolved sensor is used, the amount of phase jitter accounted for depends on the bandwidth of thebandpass ??lter used. When using the POD phase, obtained according to (4.24), no ??xed frequency has to be assumed, and the calculated phase is the optimal one in terms of energy representation. The optimal phase is related to the optimality of spatial POD modes, where these modes are understood as a prior guess for coherent structures providing the phase through projection on the snapshots. Furthermore, in contrast to a time-resolved point measurement, the POD approach predicts the phase angle from spatial modes and not from one single point in the ??ow yielding a more accurate prediction of the global phase.Construction of three-dimensional coherent structuresIt is now straightforward to construct 3D-velocity data from the two measurement planes utilizing the identi??ed symmetries of the coherent velocity vc discussed in the previous section. The approach for this construction is graphically outlined in ??gure 14, illustrating the main steps in this section.Identi??cation of a fundamental frequency by time-resolved point measurement.POD analysis of the PIV data in the two measurement planes, which identi??es dominant structures and provides the related phase information.Calculation of coherent structures with phase information and identi??cation of azimuthal symmetries through a Fourier transform.Construction of 3D data of the coherent structure using the identi??ed symmetries to extrapolate data from 2D measurement plane.In the ??nal step, the streamwise measurement plane (r–x-plane) gives the axial and radial dependence of the coherent complex amplitude Fmn(x, r) (4.26). As shown in the previous section, the fundamental frequency is related to the azimuthal wavenumber m = 1 and ??rst harmonic n = 1. Combining this information in (4.25), a spatio- temporal representation of the coherent velocity is given by Before we discuss the results obtained from the linear stability analysis, we would like to recall its simplifying assumptions. Due to the occurrence of vortex breakdown, the underlying time-averaged ??ow exhibits strong gradients in the axial direction. Hence, the employed parallel-??ow assumption for the normal mode decomposition (4.4) is violated due to these gradients. Various approaches have been developed  to overcome this shortcoming of the linear theory, generally restricted to small deviations. Intriguingly, wavelength and radial amplitude distribution are often found to be reasonably well approximated by the eigensolution of the Orr–Sommerfeld equation solely based on a locally parallel ??ow. In this study, we do not pause to incorporate non-parallel e??ects.In the scheme of linear stability analysis, the spatial ampli??cation rate αi is computed for the azimuthal wavenumber m = 1 in order to derive the coherent velocity of the single helical instability mode that is observed in the experiment. The complex wavenumber was calculated for real frequencies in the range at four di??erent axial locations. The spatial branches are displayed in ??gure 15. Note that the frequency ω is normalized by the length scale R(x) and velocity scale V (x) (see 4.1.1), whereas the Strouhal number St associated with the global oscillation frequency is based on the bulk velocity U and nozzle diameter D. The global frequency expresseby ω increases in the downstream direction as the downstream increase of R is more rapid than the decay of U (see the open circles in ??gure 15). At the axial locations where the ??ow is unstable to the global frequency, only one unstable spatial branch is found and the spatial ampli??cation rate can easily be tracked in the downstream direction. Waves forced at the global frequency grow rapidly near the nozzle exit where the shear layer is thin relative to the nozzle radius. As the shear layer spreads in the radial direction with increasing downstream distance, the spatial ampli??cation rate at St = 0.49 decreases. The corresponding spatial branch downstream of the point of neutral ampli??cation is stable for all frequencies.The evolution of the spatial growth rate αi with downstream distance is investigated in detail by computing the eigenmodes for various streamwise locations at the global frequency of St = 0.49 (??gure 16). Accordingly, the spatial growth rate decreases continuously with downstream distance reaching natural ampli??cation at x/D = 1.28. Downstream of the neutral point, the decaying rate increases in the axial direction up to x/D = 2. In the decaying region several modes coexist and the spatial branch that corresponds to the most unstable mode is tracked from the unstable regime where only one mode exists by minimizing the distance between the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues (see the last paragraph of section 4.1.3 for further details). Note that in the bottom-right frame of ??gure 15, only the spatial branch that corresponds to the most unstable mode is shown. The computed axial wavelength of themost ampli??ed mode is displayed as a function of x/D in ??gure 16. The rapid decrease in wavelength in the axial direction is caused by non-parallel e??ects. The convectively unstable modes are ampli??ed at constant frequency while they travel downstream. Due to the pronounced jet widening, their convection velocity, that is related to U , is rapidly decaying in the axial direction, thus causing the wavelength to decrease.The accuracy of the stability analysis is validated by comparing the computed eigenfunctions with the actually measured phase-averaged velocities described in 4. The eigenfunction of the most ampli??ed mode is computed at x/D = 0.57, the axial location where cross??ow measurements were conducted. Comparing the empirical mode, displayed in ??gure 13, to the stability mode, displayed in ??gure 17(b), shows obvious similarities. Both modes agree well in the outer region of the jet where they are most energetic ( y/D > 0.5). In the inner region the structures seem to be out of phase and the coherent velocity near the jet core that is evident from the measurements is not modelled by the eigenmodes. As stated previously, the present stability analysis is only valid for the outer convective unstable region of the jet. In particular, near the jet core close to the nozzle exit where coherent velocity indicates the location of the wavemaker, the present analysis should produce wrong estimations. Further downstream of the wavemaker, the agreement of the eigenmodes to the phase-averaged measurements improves even for the inner region of the jet. This is shown by constructing the streamwise shape of the global mode from the locally computed eigenfunctions and eigenvalues. According to Gaster (1968), the overall growth of a disturbance can be calculated by integrating the complex α along x, yieldingwhere α is complex and x0 is the location of the ??rst measured pro??le with x0/D = 0.2. In order to consistently ensemble the local eigenmodes to a global solution, the eigenvector X was normalized using the Euclidean norm ??X?? = (X, X), and thephase angle was equalized at the characteristic jet radius R. The resulting coherent velocity distribution along the streamwise plane is shown in ??gure 17(a).Except for the jet core region upstream x/D = 0.7 where the wavemaker is located, the computations agree well with the empirical POD modes shown in ??gure 11. The axial wavelength and the radial amplitude distribution are well estimated. Even the overall ampli??cation is well approximated with the maximum coherent amplitude at x/D ≈ 1.25 and the decaying region further downstream.Three-dimensional shape of the global modeFinally, the empirically extracted mode and the mode derived from the stability model are constructed in the entire three-dimensional domain. By adding the time-averaged mean ??ow to the coherent velocities, the global mode renders a physically plausible shape as can be seen in ??gure 18. The blue helix represents an iso-surface having constant phase-averaged azimuthal vorticity. For the upper ??gure the phase averagewas derived applying the empirical approach based on the POD as outlined in 4.2, whereas for the lower ??gure the phase-averaged velocity was derived from the linear stability analysis based on the analytically approximated mean ??ow as outlined in 4.1. Both methods reveal the same structure. It represents the m = 1 mode that rotates in the clockwise direction with the base ??ow at a rotation rate corresponding to St = 0.49. The yellow streamlines and the grey LIC-surface (linear integral convolution; see e.g. Cabral & Leedom 1993; Stalling & Hege 1995) are computed from the actually measured time-averaged ??ow. The streamlines are intended to visualize the direction of rotation of the mean ??ow and also indicate the mean boundary of the recirculation bubble. Note that the streamlines are orientated perpendicularly to the roll-axis of the helical mode. Accordingly, the helical structure is co-rotating but counter-winding. Similar observations have been found in experiments by Liang & Maxworthy (2005) and in DNS computations conducted by Ruith et al. (2003). The LIC surface visualizes the ??ow structures inside the recirculation bubble showing a stationary ring-like vortex. This structure must be carefully interpreted because the time-averaged ??ow ??eld of the inner region of the recirculation bubble di??ers strongly from the phase-averaged or instantaneous ??ow. It is observed that the entire recirculation bubble meanders around the jet center in phase with the outer coherent structure. As mentioned above, the frequency of the global mode is dictated by the wavemaker located on the jet center. This precessing of the vortex core is not visible in ??gure 18 since the level of the vorticity iso-contour was selected to most properly visualize the structures in the outer region of the jet and is therefore too high for visualizing the structures located in the interior of the jet.Concluding remarksThe coherent structures of strongly swirled jets undergoing vortex breakdown were investigated. The nature of these structures was phenomenologically observed, whereupon power spectra measured by a hot wire indicated that this ??ow regime exhibits pronounced harmonic oscillations. The origin of these oscillations was studied by two independent experimental techniques. First, the lock-in behaviour of the forced ??ow was investigated and it revealed a linear relationship between the forcing frequency and the critical lock-in amplitude. Second, the limit-cycle amplitude of the dominant mode was observed to be proportional to the square root of the deviation from the swirl magnitude considered as a control parameter. Both observations corroborate quantitative relationships of a self-excited oscillatory global mode originating from a supercritical Hopf bifurcation. In other words, the results are consistent with mean-??eld theory. The phase-averaged velocities show  the existence of a co-rotating counter-winding helical mode. Most energy of its intensity is located in the outer region of the jet. A similar structure was observed experimentally by Liang & Maxworthy (2005) and in numerical simulations by Ruith et al. (2003). Theoretical considerations of Gallaire et al. (2006) suggest that the self- excited global mode originates from a local region of absolute instability located in the jet center. These results are con??rmed by our observation where a strong precessing of the vortex core sets the pace of the ampli??ed instabilities in the outer part of   the jet.The observed oscillatory helical structures were then closely examined. Starting with an experiment using 2D uncorrelated PIV snapshots in a streamwise and  a cross??ow plane, the 3D time-dependent coherent structures were extracted by kinematic and dynamic considerations, exploiting the observed dominant periodicityof the ??ow. The kinematic velocity ??eld reconstruction started from the uncorrelated 2D streamwise velocity ??elds determined by PIV. The pronounced oscillatory nature of the ??uctuations was evidenced by two leading POD modes spanning a corresponding convecting vortex pattern. These two POD modes allowed one to attribute a phase  to each snapshot taken. A continuous time dependence was imposed by assuming a single oscillation frequency, consistent with the experimental measurements. This assumption allows for restoration of time dependence provided that small-amplitude variations of the turbulent ??ow such as the less-energetic higher harmonics and stochastic small-scale ??uctuations are negligible. A 3D ??ow pattern was reconstructed by exploiting an azimuthal symmetry of the observed helical coherent structures. The resulting 3D ??ow pattern corroborates PIV observations in cross??ow planes. Thus, the spatio-temporal evolution of the full 3D helical structure was obtained from 2D uncorrelated data sets.The velocity ??eld of the global mode was also derived by means of a linear stability analysis employing the measured mean ??ow. A spatial approach was justi??ed by previous experiments conducted by the authors, showing that the wavemaker generating the global oscillations is located inside the jet central core upstream of the recirculation bubble imposing its frequency on the outer shear layer where instabilities are convective. Hence, for a purely spatial analysis, the precessing vortex core upstream of the vortex breakdown location was considered as a ‘natural oscillator’ and the convectively unstable surrounding ??ow ??eld was modelled as being externally forced. The spatial approach is corroborated a posteriori by the good agreement of the stability eigenmodes, ampli??cation rates and wavelengths with the corresponding quantities of the measured phase-averaged ??ow, particularly in the periphery of the recirculation bubble. The theoretical prediction was less accurate in the interior of  the jet near the wavemaker location due to the convective type of the analysis. The good agreement in the convective unstable region also gives credibility to the above- mentioned empirical reconstruction of the 3D time-periodic ??ow, using the same velocity ??eld ansatz.Finally, a three-dimensional portrait of the global mode was constructed from experimental data and from the theoretical model. Both approaches represent a co- rotating, counter-winding single helical coherent structure that is wrapped around the recirculation zone – in a remarkable agreement. The vortex axis is perpendicular to the mean ??ow direction which is characteristic for the Kelvin–Helmholtz type of instability. The good agreement between instability and POD-based eigenmodes is neither self-evident nor completely unusual in free shear ??ows. Our study reveals that the highly swirled jet has similar dynamics as, e.g. the wake ??ow with an absolutely unstable clock-work of vortex shedding in the recirculation zone and convectively moving structures in the far wake. Moreover, our study provides simple and e??ective kinematic and dynamic tools that complete the coherent-structure extraction from  2D PIV data. The proposed approach is expected to be applicable to a large class of other shear ??ows.The authors acknowledge the funding and excellent working conditions of the Collaborative Research Center (Sfb 557) ‘Control of complex turbulent shear ??ows’ which is supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) and hosted at the Berlin Institute of Technology. Anatoli Tumin is gratefully acknowledged for his helpful suggestions to set up the linear stability solver. The authors appreciate valuable stimulating discussions with Gilead Tadmor, Jonas Moeck and Beno????t Pier. The 3D ??ow visualizations have been prepared with Amira software (Zuse Institute, Berlin).They also wish to thank the reviewers for their helpful suggestions for improvement of an earlier draft.


