                               Dropwise condensation theory revisited: Part I. Droplet nucleation radius

Abstract 
     An improved thermodynamic model is developed for the critical radius for droplet condensation on subcooled surfaces having a promoter coating layer. In addition to heat conduction through the droplet, this model takes into consideration thermal resistances of the coating layer, the liquid vapor interface, and curvature depression of the equilibrium interface temperature, which are important in nanosize droplets. The critical radius for droplet condensation is obtained based on the availability criterion, and effects of contact angles, degree of subcooling, thickness and thermal conductivity of the coating layer, and saturated pressure on droplet nucleation radius are illustrated. Furthermore, the critical radius for condensation on a superhydrophilic subcooled surface without a promoter coating layer obtained from this new model recovers to the critical radius of droplet condensation in classical heterogeneous nucleation of droplets.

Introduction
     About 80 years ago, Schmidt et al. found that dropwise condensation heat transfer had a much higher heat transfer coefficient than that of dropwise condensation. Since that time, much experimental and theoretical work has been carried out on dropwise condensation heat transfer. In early years, the problem of onset of droplet condensation was the focus of study. In 1936, Jakob proposed that very thin layers of steam condensed initially on the subcooled surface, and the thin film fractured into droplets after a certain thickness was reached. Tammann and Boehme proposed a different droplet condensation mechanism, suggesting that droplet nuclei randomly existed initially on subcooled surfaces. This mechanism was later confirmed by McCormick and Baer＊s experimental observation, which showed that droplets nucleated on cavities on the condenser surface. Umur  and Griffith used an optical microscope to detect thin films of molecular dimensions, and no film greater than a monolayer thickness. Based on the equilibrium theory of Gibbs free energy and assuming that temperature of the vapor at a uniform temperature, Graham and Griffith gave the following expression for the critical radius for droplet condensation on a subcooled wall at Tw with the degree of subcooling given by DTsub, i.e. where ql is the density of the liquid, rlv the liquid每vapor surface tension, T is the saturated temperature of the vapor, and hfg the latent heat. Eq. (1) has been used for calculation of critical radius for drop- wise condensation heat transfer until recently. Most recently, Quan et al. obtained the critical radius for droplet condensation on a subcooled surface in a saturated vapor based on changes in Gibbs free energy and availability analyses, assuming a linear temperature distribution between the wall and the top  of the droplet at a saturated temperature. A review of literature on early work on onset of droplet condensation, droplet nucleation density, single droplet heat transfer, and nucleation mechanism from the molecular viewpoint is given by Khandekar and Muralidhar.
    In this paper, we will obtain the critical radius for onset of droplet condensation on a subcooled wall having a promoter coating layer based on the change in availability. This new model takes into consideration thermal resistances of the coating layer, the liquid vapor interface, and curvature depression of the equilibrium interface temperature, where the latter two effects become important in nanosize droplets. Thus, the new model for the critical radius for droplet condensation differs from previous models in two different aspects: (i) there is no need to assume temperature distribution in the droplet adjacent to the wall such as uniform temperature in or linear temperature distribution in, and (ii) effects of thermal resistance of coating, interfacial thermal resistance of the liquid vapor interface as well as curvature depression are taken into consideration. This newly developed model on the critical radius of heterogeneous droplet condensation will be applied to the study of dropwise condensation heat transfer on a subcooled surface in Part II of this paper series.

Thermodynamic analyses on onset of droplet condensation
    Consider the formation of a droplet with radius r on a smooth subcooled surface at Tw having a coating layer with thickness d in a saturated vapor at Ts and ps, as shown in Fig. 1. We now carry out a thermodynamic analysis to study onset of droplet condensa- tion on a subcooled surface by making the following two assumptions: The local temperature of vapor before onset of droplet conden- sation is the same as after onset of droplet condensation, i.e. This assumption is based on the local thermal equilibrium of the vapor and liquid before and after onset of droplet condensation. The vapor adjacent to surface before onset of droplet condensation is at ps(Ts) where ps(Ts) is the saturated pressure at Ts and at Tv (where Tv < Ts), i.e., at a subcooled state, or ps(Ts) > ps(Tv), i.e., at a supersaturated state.
    The change in Gibbs free energy from local supersaturated vapor to subcooled liquid is presented in a p每T diagram as shown in Fig. 2, where the supersaturated vapor initially at Point 2 is condensed into subcooled liquid at Point 3 undergoing a constant temperature process. The vapor before phase change is at Point 2, where ps(Tv) > ps(Ts) = pv, so that the vapor is supersaturated or subcooled initially. The liquid inside the droplet at Point 3 is subcooled because  pl > pv. We  now determine. The specific Gibbs function g=G/m is the change in specific Gibbs free energy from subcooled vapor to subcooled liquid undergoing a constant temperature process can be calculated from. To evaluate the second term in the right hand side of Eq. (4), we note that one of the thermodynamic relations gives where s is specific entropy, cp is specific heat at constant pressure and v is specific volume of the fluid. In order to obtain the specific Gibbs free energy of the liquid gl at Point 3 and the specific Gibbs free energy of the vapor gv at Point 2, one saturated state at Point 1 or Point 4 is chosen for simplification of dp = 0 and dT = 0, respectively. For the constant pressure process for vapor from a saturated condition at Point 1 at temperature Ts and pressure ps(Ts) to Point 2 at a subcooled state with temperature Tv and pressure ps(Ts), the specific entropy of vapor can be given by an integration of Eq. (5) from Point 1 to Point 2 to give. and the specific entropy of liquid at Point 3 can be obtained from an integration of Eq. (5) from Point 1 to Point 3 to give for liquid is used in Eq. (7). The change of specific entropy between the vapor before droplet nucleation and liquid after droplet nucleation by subtracting Eq. (7) from Eq. (6) to give. 
    To evaluate the first term in the right-hand side of Eq. (4), we note that another thermodynamic relation for the change in enthalpy between the supersaturated vapor at Point 2 and the subcooled liquid at Point 3 can be calculated accordingly. And the enthalpy of supersaturated vapor at temperature Tv and pressure ps(Ts) at Point 2 and the enthalpy of the subcooled liquid  at temperature T and pressure p at Point 3 is. Expanding the third term at the right hand of Eq. (11) with a Taylor expansion and neglecting small terms, the above equation gives. which is also given by Quan et al. Eq. (12) can also be obtained by the second approach, by way of Point 4 (a saturated state) at Tl (or Tv) and ps(Tv) to Point 2 at Tv and ps(Ts) for vapor, and to Point 3 at Tl and pl for liquid, which is an isothermal process with dT = 0. The change in chemical potential can be calculated from Gibbs每Duhem equation. where ps(Tv) is the saturated pressure at Tv and Rg is the specific gas constant. On the other hand, for the subcooled liquid phase at Point 3, Eq. (13) is used again to calculate its chemical potential from Point  4 to Point  3. Since  the  liquid  is  virtually  incompressible with vl  taken to be constant,  its chemical potential is determined as. where p (T ) is the saturated pressure at T. Eqs. (14) and (15) were obtained previously by Khandekar and Muralidhar. For a pure substance, the specific Gibbs free energy is equal with its chemical potential. With the help of the assumption Tv = Tl, the change in specific Gibbs free energy is. An integration of the Clausius Clapeyron equation gives rise to the saturated pressure equation as. The change of availability during droplet condensation is given by. where Alv, Asl and Asv is the surface area change of liquid vapor, solid liquid, and solid vapor interface after nucleation. When Young＊s equation is applied, and combining it with Eq. (12), then Eq. (19) can be simplified to. where Tl is the temperature inside the droplet and h is the contact angle. In order to perform the integration in Eq. (20), Graham and drop
    Griffith assumed that Tl is uniform and Quan et al assumed that Tl is linear with distance from the wall. In the following, we will derive Tl without making any assumption in its temperature distribution and then obtain the critical radius for droplet condensation.

Determination of temperature inside the droplet
    We note from Fig. 3 that the liquid temperature Tl in the droplet can be obtained from where Rg is the specific gas constant. The local differential volume where the right-hand side of Eq. (21a) can be obtained from Kim
and Kim  as follows. Where d is the thickness of the coating, and u is a shape fitted coordinate introduced by Kim and Kim for droplet which is related to x and h (see Fig. 3) by. Which is in terms of the local coordinate u. Substituting Eq. (22) for interesting to note that the change in availability is equal to zero for a subcooled superhydrophilic surface with h = 0. This implies that filmwise condensation occurs on a superhydrophilic subcooled surface without any nucleation work.
    We now obtain the critical radius rc for heterogeneous droplet nucleation from Eq. (26a) according to where the value of the critical radius rc is obtained from Eq. (26) numerically. Note that in all of previous droplet nucleation theories, the minimum radius for droplet was assumed to be Rmin=r0 but in this paper we will assume that rmin = rc, which is determined below.

Results and discussion
     In this section, we will present results of the critical radius rc for droplet condensation of water vapor on a subcooled wall based on Eq. (26). Effects of subcooled degree, contact angle, coating thickness, thermal conductivity of coating layer and saturated vapor pressure on the critical radius will be analyzed. Also, the variation of change in availability versus droplet radius will be discussed.
    The change in availability DW given by Eq. (26a) during forma- tion of an embryo droplet in a subcooled water under the condition of  DT sub = 4 ∼C and Ts = 100 ∼C for contact angles of h=5∼ and h=150∼ is shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b) respectively, where the critical radii rc are obtained based on the criterion of DW/or =0, where the change in availability is given by Eq.(26a). As shown from Fig. 4(a) and (b), the critical radii are 5.0 nm  for  h = 5∼ and 5.6 nm for h=150∼,  and the corresponding changes in availability are respectively.  Comparing Fig. 4(a) and (b), it can be seen that both the critical radius and the change in availability increase with an increase in the contact angle.
    The critical embryo radius for droplet condensation on a subcooled surface obtained from the above model at DW/or = 0 without a promoter coating layer is given in Fig. 5. The result from the classical heterogeneous droplet nucleation given by Eq. (1) is also presented. It is shown from this figure that the critical radius for droplet condensation decreases with increasing degrees of subcooling. At the same degree of subcooling, the critical droplet radius increases with increasing contact angle. This is because the base area of the droplet becomes smaller at larger contact angles. On the other hand, the contact angle plays an important role for the droplet nucleation radius on hydrophobic surfaces, specifically at small degrees of subcooling. It should be noted that the present model for critical radius of droplet condensation in the limit of h0 almost recovers to the Eq. (1). This is because at the limit case of h=0 (a superhydrophilic surface), the droplet is  in contact with the subcooled surface with only one contact point and therefore the droplet temperature is uniform at Ts which demonstrates the validity of the present model. To see clearly the results at h = 0∼, an enlarged graph is plotted at the top right corner of Fig. 5, and a comparison of critical radii computed from the present model with h=0 and those from Eq. (1) is also presented in Table 1. It should be pointed out that film condensation can be considered as dropwise condensation with small critical droplet radius, which occurs on a superhydrophilic surface with h0. Thus, the curves for h=0 can be considered as the occurrence of filmwise condensation on a superhydrophilic surface.
    Temperature drops due to four thermal resistances in a single droplet at onset of condensation with critical radius rc computed according to Eqs. (21c), (23c), (23d) and (23e) for a surface with no coating at DTsub = 4 ∼C and Ts=100 ∼C are listed in Table 2. In this table, xi is the location of the interface at the top of the droplet (where u = h) which was computed according to Eq. (21d). From this table, we can see that the most important part of the four thermal resistances is the temperature depression due to the curvature effect which is large compared with the thermal conduction resistance through the embryo droplet. This is because the radius  r of an embryo droplet is very small, so the thermal resistance due to curvature is relatively large as determined by  Eq. 
Temperature distributions Tl in the droplet with respect to both   of u and x are presented in Fig. 6. The interfaces for these two cases are at xi = 5.017 nm for h = 90∼, and xi = 9.617 nm for h = 150∼ respectively. It is shown from Fig. 6(a) that although temperature varies linearly with respect to u, it varies nonlinearly with respect to x Fig. 6(d) at large contact angles. Thus, the assumption of an uniform temperature distribution in the droplet in the classical model for heterogeneous condensation  was wrong (since  it is valid only in the limit of h = 0 when filmwise condensation occurs on a superhydrophilic surface as mentioned earlier), and the assumption of a linear temperature distribution in the droplet for heterogeneous condensation is not accurate at large contact angles.
    Condensers are usually made of copper or aluminum which is hydrophilic in contact with water. A coating layer is usually applied on the subcooled surface to increase the contact angle of the subcooled surface for the purpose of promoting dropwise condensation heat transfer, which is a common industrial practice. Organic polymers such as polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE, ＆Tefion＊), and dioctadecy disulphide etc., are usually  applied  as the coating. Although coatings can promote good hydrophobicity, their thermal conductivities are very small (about 0.25 W/m K) compared with metals. These promoter coating layers will lead to an additional thermal resistance to the dropwise condensation process as analyzed in Section 2.2. Moreover, since the embryo droplet is in the range of nanometers, the thermal resistance due to coating layer will be especially significant. The effect of pro- moter coating layer on the embryo droplet radius is investigated below.nucleation radius on a promoter coating layer with respect to degree of subcooled and contact angle are similar with those with- out a coating layer. The critical radius for droplet condensation increases with the addition of a coating layer. Effects of contact angle are more remarkable on a surface with coating (Fig. 8) than those without a coating layer (Fig. 5). Also, the critical radius for onset of droplet condensation will not recover to Eq. (1) for a con- tact angle close to 0 if a coating layer is added on the substrate. Fig. 7 shows the effect of coating on changes in availability during droplet condensation. It is seen that the change in availability becomes larger with the addition of a coating layer. The maximum DW occurs at a larger critical radius for droplet condensation on a surface with coating than with those without a coating layer. Fig. 8 presents the critical radius for onset of droplet condensa- tion on a coating layer with thickness d=0.1 lm and thermal conductivity kcoat = 0.25 W/m K. The variation trends of droplet. Heat transfer characteristics of a single embryo droplet on a coating layer with d = 0.1 lm and kcoat = 0.25 W/m K at DTsub = 4 ∼C and Ts = 100 ∼C is given in Table 3 and Fig. 9. It is shown in Table 3
that the most important part of the four thermal resistances is the temperature depression resulting from the curvature. And the thermal conduction resistance through the embryo droplet is very small compared to the curvature effect. Comparing Table 3 with Table 2, it can be seen that DTdrop with coating is bigger than that without coating. This is because at a given degree of subcooling (say DTsub = 4 ∼C), droplet nucleates on a coating with a larger radius, so DTcur decreases according to Eq. (23d). And DTi increases with more liquid每vapor interface at a larger radius according to Eq. (23e). The temperature distribution inside the droplet is presented in Fig. 9 where the top interface for these two cases is located at xi = 8.68 nm for h = 90∼, and xi= 58.4 nm for h = 150∼ respectively. As shown in Fig. 9(d), temperature distribution inside the droplet is not linear with respect to x at a large contact angle. Fig. 10 shows the effect of coating layer＊s thickness on the crit- ical radius for onset of droplet condensation. It can be seen that a thicker coating layer will give rise to a larger critical radius for con- densation, since a thicker coating layer will increase its thermal resistance.  For a 1 lm coating layer with kcoat =0.25 W/m K, h=90∼ and Ts=100 ∼C, the critical radius for droplet condensation
is about 8 times larger than that prediction by Eq. (1) without a coating  layer.  A coating  layer with  thickness d < 0.1 lm has little influence on the droplet nucleation radius, so an ultrathin coating layer is desirable for dropwise condensation. For this reason, much work has been done to fabricate monolayer promoters for the purpose of promoting dropwise condensation. Fig. 11 shows effects of coating thermal conductivity on droplet nucleation radius. It can be seen that a coating layer with higher thermal conductivity will decrease droplet nucleation radius, since coating with higher thermal conductivity will reduce the thermal resistance of the heat transfer process. So, a thin coating layer with high thermal conductivity can decrease the droplet nucleation radius and is favorable for promoting dropwise condensation. Fig. 12 shows the effect of saturated vapor pressure ps on the critical radius for droplet condensation. Since values of thermophysical properties, such as saturated temperature Ts, latent heat hfg, liquid vapor density ql and qv, and surface tension rlv, are all related to the saturated pressure ps(Ts), physical properties will affect the critical radius for droplet condensation. It can be seen from Fig. 12 that the critical radius for droplet condensation increases at higher saturated vapor pressures. This is because at high saturated pressure ps, Ts increases while hfg decreases, the critical radius for droplet con- densation will be enlarged according to Eq. (1).

Concluding remarks
    In this paper, a thermodynamic model based on Gibbs free energy and availability is developed for heterogeneous condensa- tion nucleation on a subcooled surface with coatings. This model is a modification of previous dropwise nucleation theories in which the thermal resistance of coating on the surface, the interfacial thermal resistance of the liquid vapor interface and curvature depression of the equilibrium interface temperature have been taken into consideration. Based on the nucleation criterion for change of availability oDW/or = 0, nanometer scale critical radius for dropwise condensation can be predicted. The following conclusions can be drawn from this paper:
    Droplet condensation radius is small (in nm) at large degree of subcooling. Thus, the interface effect of temperature drop from vapor to liquid is very large and cannot be neglected.
    For subcooled surfaces having large contact angles, the temperature inside the nanoscale condensate droplet is not linear with respect to distance perpendicular from the subcooled surface.
    At high contact angles, the base area of the droplet in contact with the subcooled surface is small, resulting in a high thermal resistance and large droplet nucleation radius.
    At zero contact angle (i.e., a superhydrophilic subcooled surface), nano droplets with a uniform temperature at Ts are formed with a point contact with the subcooled surface at Tw. Film condensation occurs on a superhydrophilic surface at (h = 0∼) without nucleation work and condensation heat transfer.
    Although the addition of a coating layer can promote dropwise condensation, it will also increase the thermal resis- tance of the condensation process. A thin hydrophobic coating layer with a high thermal conductivity will decrease droplet nucleation radius and is desirable in practice.
    At higher vapor pressures with higher saturated temperature and smaller latent heat, the droplet nucleation radius will be enlarged.