

Engineering Applications of Computational Fluid Mechanics 


Characteristics of Secondary Flow Induced by 90-Degree Elbow in Turbulent Pipe Flow 
Jongtae Kim, Mohan Yadav & Seungjin Kim 
To cite this article: Jongtae Kim, Mohan Yadav & Seungjin Kim (2014) Characteristics of Secondary Flow Induced by 90-Degree Elbow in Turbulent Pipe Flow, Engineering Applications of Computational Fluid Mechanics, 8:2, 229-239, DOI: 10.1080/19942060.2014.11015509 

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/19942060.2014.11015509 


Copyright 2014 Taylor and Francis Group LLC 

Published online: 19 Nov 2014. 
Submit your article to this journal 


Article views: 4477 
View related articles 

View Crossmark data 


Citing articles: 24 View citing articles 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tcfm20 


CHARACTERISTICS OF SECONDARY FLOW INDUCED BY 90-DEGREE ELBOW IN TURBULENT PIPE FLOW 
Jongtae Kim^*, Mohan Yadav#, and Seungjin Kim# 
^Severe Accident and PHWR Safety Research Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Republic of Korea # Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering Department, The Pennsylvania State University, USA *E-Mail: ex-kjt@kaeri.re.kr (Corresponding Author) 
ABSTRACT: The purpose of this study is to characterize the swirling secondary flow in the downstream of a pipe bend using a numerical simulation of the flow. The CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics) software OpenFOAM is used to simulate the turbulent flow in pipes with elbow. Various turbulence models are benchmarked with the existing experimental data and a comparative study is performed to select an appropriate turbulence model for the analysis. Predictions made by the selected turbulence model are compared with the LDA (Laser Doppler anemometer) measurements from the experiments currently conducted to find the dependency of the flows on the Reynolds number. It is found that the swirl intensity of the secondary flow is a strong function of the radius of curvature of the bend and a weak function of the Reynolds number. Additionally, it is found that the dissipation of the swirl intensity is exponential in nature. 
Keywords: secondary flow, 90-degree bent elbow, swirl intensity, CFD 
1. INTRODUCTION 
A 90-degree-bent elbow is commonly used in many piping systems to connect different components. It is well known that during the flow of fluid in a pipe with elbow, a secondary motion of the flow is developed and it is superimposed on its primary streamwise flow. The secondary flow is generated due to an imbalance between centrifugal force and pressure gradient near the bent-pipe wall in the radial direction of the bend curvature. In general, the structure of the secondary flow is dependent on the radius of the bend curvature (Rc) and Reynolds number (Re) based on the pipe diameter (D) and bulk velocity (Ub). When the non-dimensional radius of curvature of the bend is greater than 1.5 (i.e. Rc/D > 1.5), the secondary flow consisting of a pair of counter-rotating vortices are generated. At the same time, the velocity profile of the primary streamwise flow is distorted and shifted away from the center of the curvature of the elbow. If Rc/D is smaller than 1.5, the flow becomes unsteady because of a flow separation occurring immediately downstream of the bend (Weske, 1948; Hellstrom et al., 2011). The flow in the downstream region of a 90-degree bend is important for the primary and secondary cooling systems of nuclear power plants, where many bends are used to interconnect the components. The distortion in the streamwise velocity profile of the coolant by an elbow can affect the distribution of heat transfer rates. In the case of a bubbly two-phase flow which may occur during an accident in a nuclear power plant, the distribution of the bubbles in the pipe with an elbow is very different compared to that in a pipe without an elbow. Due to the inherent difference in density of the two phases, the gas bubbles are driven toward the centers of the two counter-rotating swirls generated by the elbow (Yadav, 2013). This accumulation of bubbles can increase the possibility of a bubble collision and subsequently alter the interfacial heat and mass transfers. Furthermore, when the curvature radius of an elbow is small enough to create a fluctuating flow after the elbow, the downstream pipe can undergo oscillating mechanical stress, which can lead to structural fatigue in the piping system (Yamano et al., 2009). In the past, several researchers have investigated turbulent flows in pipes with elbows by means of theoretical, experimental, and numerical methods. Weske (1948) experimentally investigated the velocity distribution at the outlet of elbows with various shapes of cross-sections including round, elliptical, square, and rectangular cross sections at 

Received: 22 Jul. 2013; Revised: 12 Oct. 2013; Accepted: 9 Dec. 2013 
Reynolds numbers ranging from 0.2 to 0.6 ¡Á 106 for the design of an aircraft duct. Sudo et al. (1998) performed the experiments for turbulent flow in a 90-degree-bent pipe with Rc/D = 2. The study used a hot-wire anemometer to measure streamwise velocity (Us) and circumferential velocity (Uc) for a turbulent flow with Reynolds number of 60,000. Al-Rafai et al. (1990) performed an experimental and numerical study of a turbulent air flow in circular pipe bends to investigate the influence of Rc/D on the flow. During the experiments, two bends with Rc/D = 
3.49 and Rc/D = 6.975 were used, and the flow had the Reynolds number of 34,132. Homicz (2004) performed numerical simulations of the flow through a 90-degree elbow with a Rc/D =1.4 at a Reynolds number of 5.4¡Á105 to validate the Flow-Accelerated Corrosion (FAC) test conducted by Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI). These simulations and FAC tests are used to better characterize the flow-accelerated corrosion/erosion in the pipe elbows. More recently, Tanaka et al. (2009) applied a large eddy simulation (LES) approach using a standard Smagorinsky model with a wall function law for flows in elbows with various Rc/D at several Reynolds number conditions. Most of the above-mentioned studies focused only on the flow structure in the immediate vicinity of the elbow and only a limited number of studies investigated the flow in the downstream region of the elbows (Sudo et al., 1998; Al-Rafai et Al., 1990). The knowledge of the flow structure in the downstream region of the elbow is of significant importance to understand the dissipation characteristics of the secondary flow and to accurately assess the development of the flow structure. Additionally, an understanding of the dissipation characteristics is important in evaluating the length required for the elbow effects to be dissipated and in modeling the effects associated with flow restrictions. In view of the above, the objectives of the current study are to perform experimental and numerical studies on turbulent pipe flows after 90-degree elbows and to characterize the secondary flows induced by the 90-degree elbows including the dissipation characteristics. In order for that, it is necessary to choose an appropriate turbulence model specifically for the turbulent flow in a pipe with an elbow. Unexpectedly, there are few papers which are devoted to a numerical study of the turbulent pipe flow through an elbow. In this study, a quantitative assessment method based on hit rate using the experimental data of Sudo et al. (1998) is applied to choose an appropriate turbulence model among the available turbulence models in OpenFOAM CFD code. 

2. EXPERIMENTAL FACILITY AND MEASUREMENT 
As mentioned above, the flow structure after an elbow depends on the Reynolds number and bend curvature. An experiment is conducted to evaluate its dependency on the Reynolds number. 

Fig. 1 Experimental facility and locations of LDA measurement. 
A schematic diagram of the experimental setup, as well as the co-ordinate system used for the current study, is shown in Fig. 1. The detailed description of the test facility is presented in previous studies (Yadav, 2013) and only characteristic features of the test facility are presented here. The experimental facility consists of both upstream and downstream sections constructed from 50.8mm inner diameter (D) acrylic pipes and interconnected by a 90¡ã glass elbow. The elbow has a radius of curvature of 152.4mm (3D), and the lengths of the upstream and downstream sections are 3.35m (L/D = 66) and 9.1m (L/D = 180), respectively. A laser leveling system and a digital level are employed to ensure the alignment of both the upstream and downstream sections within ¡À0.1¡ã. The flow rate for the experiments is measured by an electromagnetic flow meter, with an accuracy of ¡À0.5% of the full-scale reading. 
Table 1 Specifications of LDA employed for experiments. 
Measurement Length  300 mm  
Beam width  2.0 mm  
Measurement Volume  0.1 (mm)¡Á0.1 (mm)¡Á1.0 (mm)  
Maximum Velocity  27 m/s  
Measurable Velocity Fluctuation  From 0.7 ¦Ìm/s to 4.6 mm/s.  


An integrated Laser Doppler anemometer (LDA), which is capable of one-dimensional velocity measurements, is used to measure the axial water velocity. The light beam in the LDA is generated by 35 mW laser with a wavelength of 600 nm. The principal characteristics of the LDA are listed in Table 1. It should be noted that due to the difference in the refractive index of air, acrylic, and water, the LDA measurement volume inside the pipe is shifted by a finite amount. This shift is 
accounted for by employing Snell¡®s law. The 
tracking/seeding particles consist of Polyamide particles with a size distribution of around 20¦Ìm and specific gravity of 1.04. To ensure the statistical reliability of the measurements, a minimum of 5000 samples are measured at each local point and the validation of the burst signals was above 98%. As indicated in Fig. 1, the measurements are performed at 13D upstream of the elbow (53D from inlet) to figure out a fully-developed velocity profile and 3.5D, 10D, and 50D downstream of the elbow in the downstream section. The LDA is mounted on a two-dimensional traversing system, which has a resolution of 1¦Ìm in both traversing directions. This traversing system is further attached to a plate, which is designed with mounting holes at every 22.5¡ã in the azimuthal direction. As such, the LDA along with the traversing system can be attached to the mounting plate to measure the velocity across entire pipe cross-section. Along each azimuthal direction, the LDA is traversed to obtain measurements at 23 radial positions. These radial positions are selected such that a finer measurement mesh is obtained in the near wall region, where a higher velocity gradient is expected. 
Table 2 List of flow conditions investigated in current study. 
Test No.  Ub [m/s]  Re  
Run1  1.00  50800  
Run2  2.00  101600  
Run3  4.00  203200  

A total of three flow conditions, as shown in Table 2, are investigated in the current study. These flow conditions are selected to study the effect of increasing Reynolds number on the velocity profiles. It is expected that the swirl intensity and its decay characteristic in a pipe with a 90-degree bend are dependent on Reynolds number of flow and curvature radius of the bend. To evaluate the dependencies, the experiment of Sudo et al. (1998) was referenced. In their experiment, a bend with a curvature radius of 2D was used, and the flow velocity was measured at a Reynolds number of 60000 based on the pipe diameter and bulk velocity. The experimental facility used in this study is equipped with an elbow of 3D curvature radius. The test condition of Run1 is chosen with a bulk velocity of 1 m/s to obtain a similar Reynolds number. The experiment of Sudo et al. (1998) and Run1 in the present experiments were conducted at a similar Reynolds number with different curvature radii of 2D and 3D, respectively. The conditions of other tests, Run 2 and Run 3, are chosen by doubling the bulk velocity to scrutinize the effect of the Reynolds number. 
3. NUMERICAL  SIMULATION  OF  
TURBULENT FLOWS  IN  90-DEGREE- 
BENT PIPE  

The turbulent flow in a 90-degree-bent pipe is complicated by the secondary flow, which is generated by an imbalance of the centrifugal force and pressure gradient in the radial direction of the bend curvature. Additionally, the streamwise flow is distorted by the existence of adverse pressure gradient along the convex wall of the pipe bend. These make an accurate numerical simulation of the flow difficult, especially for turbulent flows with high Reynolds number. To select an appropriate turbulence model for the numerical simulation of a turbulent flow in a pipe with an elbow, validation of the numerical results from turbulence models is very important. In the current study, the experiments conducted by Sudo et al. (1998) on the turbulent flows in a bent pipe are used to validate the turbulence models. In addition, the selection criteria which involve a quantitative assessment are used to perform a comparative study among the tested turbulence models. The selected turbulence model is then used for evaluation of swirl characteristics in the downstream of an elbow. 

3.1 Numerical simulation of Sudo et al.¡¯s experiment 

3.1.1 Test conditions and numerical simulation 
Sudo et al. (1998) performed experiments for turbulent flow in a 90-degree-bent pipe with Rc/D = 2. A straight pipe-section with 100D of development length was installed in the upstream of the bend to provide a fully developed turbulent flow to the bend. The experiments were performed with air as the working fluid and flow Reynolds number Re = 60000. The study used a hot-wire anemometer to measure the streamwise velocity (US) and circumferential velocity (UC) at several locations along the pipe.   The open source CFD code OpenFOAM (OpenCFD, 2012) is used to simulate Sudo et al.¡®s experiments. OpenFOAM solves the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations discretized in the context of the cell-centered finite volume method (FVM). Numerical solutions are iteratively sought by pressure correction method named SIMPLE algorithm. The standard k-¦Å turbulence model is applied to choose a suitable convective scheme and under-relaxation parameters of the discretized equations. The computational domain is composed of an upstream pipe with 20D length and a downstream pipe with 50D length connected to an elbow as shown in Fig. 2. The boundary conditions at pipe inlet are set as follows: Velocity is fixed with a fully developed power-law profile which is from the experimental data of Zagarola and Smits (1999) for fully developed turbulence pipe flow. The values of the turbulent kinetic energy and its dissipation rate are calculated from the inlet turbulence intensity (5% of inlet bulk velocity in this study) and pipe diameter. 


Fig. 2 Computational geometry for simulation of 90o-bent pipe flow. 

Fig. 3 Computational mesh near pipe exit. 
The mesh for the bent pipe is generated by stacking a two-dimensional unstructured mesh of pipe cross-section along the streamwise direction to minimize the non-orthogonality of the mesh. The two-dimensional unstructured mesh of the pipe cross-section is constructed with quadrilateral cells. The constructed mesh of the bent pipe is shown in Fig. 3 where the surface mesh near the pipe exit is magnified to visualize the orthogonality of the mesh. The value of the non-dimensional distance from the pipe wall based on the friction velocity , Y+, for a near-wall cell is strictly controlled to be in the range of 20 ~ 50, when a wall-function is used. However, the Y+ value for a near-wall cell is set below 1 in the case without a wall-function. The distribution of mesh cells along the streamwise direction is selected based on iterative grid-dependency tests. So, the mesh size used in this study is depending on the use of a wall function. The mesh used for a high-Re turbulence model is composed of 152,150 hexahedral cells. But for a low-Re turbulence model, the number of cells is 562,080. Fig. 4 shows the numerical results of the Sudo et al.¡®s experiment by using the standard k-¦Å turbulence model. Fig. 4a is streamwise velocity profiles on cut-planes near the elbow, and Fig. 4b is streamlines to show the swirling flow. From the figures, it can be expected that the primary streamwise flow and secondary swirling flow are correlated in the elbow pipe flow. 

Fig. 4 Numerical results for experiment of Sudo et al. (1998): (a) streamwise velocity profiles, (b) streamlines. 


A comparison between the calculated and measured streamwise velocity profiles along the 
symmetric lines (i.e. ¦È=90¡ã) in the downstream 
region of the elbow are shown in Fig. 5. In the figure, the positive and negative r/D indicates the outer and inner part from the center of the circular pipe section, respectively. It should be noted that 
the horizontal length of the legend .+¡® used for 
the measured data in Fig. 5 indicates a ¡À10% error range normalized by the bulk velocity. It is found that the streamwise velocity components from the standard k-¦Å turbulence model agree very well with the measured data in the outer region with positive radii. On the contrary, some discrepancies between the numerical and measured data in the inner region with negative radii are observed. These discrepancies may arise due to the adverse pressure gradient near the inner wall of the pipe bend.  


Fig. 6 Comparisons of streamwise velocity components along cross lines at x/D=1, x/D=3, x/D=5, x/D=7, and x/D=10. Solid line: standard k-¦Å turbulence model, +: Experimental data of Sudo et al. (1998). 


Fig. 7 Comparisons of circumferential velocity components along cross lines at x/D=0, x/D=0.5, x/D=1, x/D=2, and x/D=5. Solid line: standard k-¦Å turbulence model, +: Experimental data of Sudo et al. (1998). 
Figs. 6 and 7 show the streamwise and circumferential velocity components, respectively, 
along the cross lines (i.e. ¦È=0¡ã) in the downstream 
region of the bend pipe. The circumferential velocity component means secondary or swirling velocity component. The velocity profiles along the cross lines are predicted well at different locations in the downstream region of the elbow. 


3.1.2 Assessment of turbulence models 
The main objective of the present study is to characterize the secondary flow in the downstream of the elbow through numerical simulations. As such, after selection of mesh size, suitable convective scheme and under-relaxation parameters, it is of great importance to select appropriate turbulence model that can simulate the flow across the elbow accurately.  In view of this, OpenFOAM contains various turbulence models, which include one-equation and two-equation models based on Boussinesq assumption, Reynolds stress transport model (RSTM), and large eddy simulation (LES). It is still challenging to apply LES for a high Reynolds number turbulent flow in a very long pipe. In this study, the RSTM turbulence models are excluded from the assessment because of numerical and turbulence model problems in obtaining an acceptable solution, and remain as future work. For the assessment, only the linear and non-linear eddy-viscosity turbulence models are considered. In Table 3, the turbulence models to be used for the assessment are listed. 
Table 3 Turbulence models used for simulation of Sudo et al.¡®s experiment. 
No  Abbr.  Turbulence model  
1  SKE  Standard k-¦Å with wall function  
2  EKE  Extended k-¦Å with wall function (Chen and Kim, 1987)  
3  RNGKE  RNG k-¦Å with wall function (Yakhot and Orszag, 1986)  
4  RKE  Realizable k-¦Å with wall function (Shih et al., 1995)  
5  KMSST  k-¦Ø SST with wall function (Menter, 1994))  
6  SNKE  Shih¡®s nonlinear k-¦Å with wall function (Shih and Zhu, 1993)  
7  LCKE  Lien cubic k-¦Å with wall function (Lien et al., 1996)  
8  LSLOW  Launder-sharma low-Re k-¦Å (Launder and Sharma, 1974)  
9  LBLOW  Lam-Bremhorst low-Re k-¦Å (Lam and Bremhorst, 1981)  
10  LCLOW  Lien cubic low-Re k-¦Å (Lien et al., 1996)  
11  LLLOW  Lien-Leschziner low-Re k-¦Å (Lien and Leschziner, 1993)  


Turbulence models can be grouped based on modeling of near wall flow and turbulent eddy viscosity. In Table 3, turbulence models numbered 1 through 7 utilize a wall-function to model the near wall region and the remaining models simulate the near-wall region without a wall-function. Shih¡®s model (No. 6 in Table 3) (Shih et al., 1993) and Lein¡®s models (Nos. 7 & 10 in Table 3) (Lien et al., 1996; Lien and Leschziner, 1993) are the non-linear models, where eddy viscosity is related by more than second moment of velocity gradient. 

Fig. 8 Comparison of streamwise velocity profiles from different turbulence models along symmetric line at x/D = 0. 

Fig. 9 Hit rates of turbulence models for streamwise velocity components on symmetric lines of Sudo et al.¡®s bent pipe, ---: average hit rate (74.3%). 
Fig. 8 shows the numerical results from different turbulence models for streamwise velocity profiles along the symmetric line at x/D = 0. The numerical results from some of the turbulence models listed in Table 3 provide reasonable 
agreement compared with Sudo et al.¡®s experimental data and Tanaka et al.¡®s LES results. 
However, it is difficult to choose an appropriate turbulence model from the qualitative comparison. As such, a quantitative assessment method is applied to select an appropriate turbulence model. Each turbulence model is implemented to simulate Sudo et al.¡®s experiments and a comparative study is performed between numerical simulations and experimental measurements. The number of points within the error bounds of the experimental data is counted. 
A comparison is called a ¨Dhit¡¬ if the numerical 
result lies within ¡À10% of the bulk velocity from the measured value, otherwise it is called a 
¨Dmiss¡¬. 


The probing locations and measured data used for the quantitative assessment of the turbulence models are plotted in Figs. 5, 6, and 7 which denote the three assessment objects, i.e., streamwise velocity component on the symmetric lines and streamwise and circumferential velocity components on the cross lines. The number of points used in each assessment is 135. Figs. 9, 10, and 11 show the hit rates for each turbulence model, where the turbulence models are sorted by the number of hits. In the assessment of streamwise velocity along the symmetric lines, SNKE has the highest number of hits followed by LCKE and RKE. It is found that along the cross 




Fig. 14 Dependency of streamwise velocity components on Reynolds number along cross lines (¦È=0¡ã) at x/D=3.5, 10, and 50, ¡ö: Exp. Run1 (Ub=1m/s, Re=50,800), ¡Á: Exp. Run 2 (Ub=2m/s, Re=101,600), +: Exp. Run 3 (Ub=4m/s, Re=203,200). 
without wall functions, such as LSLOW, LLLOW, LBLOW, and LCLOW, have a higher than average number of hits. However, in the assessment of circumferential velocity along the cross lines, the low-Re number turbulence models perform poorly and KMSST & RNGKE record the highest number of hits. The above assessment shows that some of the turbulence models consistently perform below the average. These turbulence models are eliminated from the future assessments. Additionally, it is not likely to find a single turbulence model with maximum number of hits for all three assessments. As such, two additional criteria are applied for the selection of an appropriate turbulence model. The first step utilizes the average number of hits for each assessment and the second criterion considers the deviation from the maximum hit rate. The deviation of each assessment, 
, from the maximum hit rate is given by: 

(1) 
where xi, xmax, and N represent the hit rate for the ith turbulence model, maximum hit rate and the number of turbulence models used in the assessment, respectively It is found that RNGKE has consistently greater than average hit rates for the assessment of all the three velocity profiles. Although SNKE has highest number of hits for the streamwise velocity along the symmetric lines, it does not predict other velocity profiles satisfactorily. Therefore, SNKE is not considered for the final calculations. Four turbulence models namely, EKE, RNGKE, RKE, and KMSST satisfy the criterion based on the deviation from the maximum hit rate. In order to select a single turbulence model out of these four, the selection criterion is changed to reduce the range of deviation by 2/3 of ¦Ò. Based on this quantitative assessment RNGKE turbulence model is selected for investigating the flow in the elbow. This is consistent with the previous study (Homicz, 2004), which has shown that RNGKE turbulence model performs better than SKE for flow in bends. Also in the simulation of Rahimzadeh et al. (2012) of a turbulent flow over circular spillways, it is seen that RNGKE turbulence model gives very similar results to experiment and RSTM model. 





3.2 Analysis of current experiment 

lines, the streamwise velocity is predicted well by most of the turbulence models except SNKE and The experiment on a turbulent flow in a pipe with LCKE. The low-Re number turbulence models a 90-degree-bent elbow conducted in this study is numerically simulated with the RNGKE turbulence model, which was chosen through a quantitative evaluation of the simulation results of 
Sudo et al.¡®s bend pipe. Numerical and 
experimental results are shown in Figs. 12 and 13 for the case of Run1 where the bulk velocity is 1 m/s and its Reynolds number is 50,800. Streamwise velocity distributions along vertical symmetric lines at 3.5D, 10D, and 50D in the horizontal pipe after the elbow are plotted in Fig. 
12. It is seen in the figure that the streamwise velocity is shifted upward just after the elbow, and is redistributed downstream. Fig. 13 shows the streamwise velocity distributions along the horizontal cross lines at the same locations as in Fig. 12. The symmetry of the flow is easily observed from the figure. The streamwise velocity near the pipe wall is a little augmented because of its reduction in the central region of the pipe section by swirls at 3.5D. However, the peaks near the pipe wall are diffused by turbulent dissipation at 10D. It looks like the calculated results by the currently used numerical schemes and turbulence model match well with the measured data. From a comparison of the velocity profiles, it can be thought that the turbulence model used in this study gives mostly acceptable results for the flow in a bend pipe. To evaluate the dependency of a flow after the elbow on the Reynolds number, the streamwise velocities normalized by the bulk velocity of each test are compared in Fig. 14. It is shown that the velocity profiles from the three tests are coincident with each other, which means that there exists a similarity in the structure of flows after a bend with the same curvature radius if the Reynolds number is in the range of 50000 and 200000. Furthermore, it is found that the normalized velocity at the center of the pipe at 50D downstream of the elbow decreases with increasing Reynolds number. This happens because in a fully developed turbulent pipe flow the flattening of the velocity profile increases with Re. This observation is also consistent with the recent experiments in super-pipe flow facility (Zagarola and Smits, 1997). The streamwise velocities from a numerical simulation of the three test cases Run1, Run2, and Run3 are compared in Fig. 15. The velocity profiles along the cross lines at three different locations downstream of the elbow coincide well with each other, as do the measured data. It is also shown in the figure that the velocity near the center of the pipe at 50D downstream is flattened more as the Reynolds number increases. 

Fig. 15 Dependency of streamwise velocity components on Reynolds number along cross lines (¦È=0¡ã) at x/D=3.5, 10, and 50, ©¥©¥: Calc. Run1 (Ub=1m/s, Re=50,800), ..: Calc. Run 2 (Ub=2m/s, Re=101,600), ¡¤¡¤-¡¤¡¤: Calc. Run 3 (Ub=4m/s, Re=203,200). 


Fig. 17 Decay of swirl intensity along straight pipe after elbow with Rc = 2D. 



4. CHARACTERIZATION OF SECONDARY FLOW INDUCED BY 90-DEGREE BEND 
In this section, the dissipation characteristics of secondary flow in the downstream region of the 90-degree elbow are discussed. The secondary flow generated during the flow across the elbows consists of two counter-rotating vortices or swirls. In general, the strength of a swirl on a cut plane normal to the axial flow direction is represented by the swirl number (Chigier and Beer, 1964). The swirl number is the area-averaged flux of angular momentum and it is used to quantify the strength of a swirl around the axis of the main flow. However, a direct application of the swirl number to counter-rotating vortices such as those created by the secondary flow in an elbow is not appropriate. To define the intensity of counter-rotating swirls, Sudo et al. (1998) used the magnitude of velocity tangential to a pipe section area. Eq. (2) shows the definition of the swirl intensity used for the elbow flows in this study. 

(2) where 
is the swirl intensity, 
is the vector of 
the flow velocity and 
is a unit vector normal to the pipe section area. To obtain the area-averaged swirl intensity at each pipe section along the downstream pipe after the elbow, the flow solution is mapped to a two-dimensional mesh with the same area as the pipe section because of the use of unstructured meshes in this study, and the tangential velocities from the mapped solution are integrated on the 2-D mesh. Fig. 16 shows planar 2-D meshes inserted in the computational domain for a pipe flow. In the figure, the dark-colored areas mean the 2-D meshes used for area-averaged swirl intensities. The intensity of secondary flow calculated from Eq. (2) at different axial locations downstream of the elbow is normalized by the value of intensity at the exit of the elbow. The normalized swirl intensity for elbow with Rc/D = 2 along the downstream pipe after the elbow is depicted in Fig. 17. It can be seen that the swirl intensity generated by the elbow is exponentially diminished along the downstream pipe. The numerical result by the RNG k-¦Å turbulence model reproduces well the decay characteristic of 
the swirl obtained by Sudo et al.¡®s experiment.  
In the same way, the decay characteristic of the secondary flow downstream of the elbow with curvature radius of 3D, which represents the experimental facility used in this study, is evaluated only based on the numerical solutions because the swirl components of the flow velocities are not measured in the experiment. The swirl intensities for the three test conditions (Run1, Run2, and Run3) were calculated along the downstream horizontal pipe. Transitions of the swirl intensities along the pipe for the three cases (50800 ¡Ü Re ¡Ü 203200) are shown in Fig. 18. In the comparison of the swirl intensities among the cases, as shown in the figure, they show similar trends of swirl intensity decay to the case of 2D curvature radius of elbow with a minor dependency on the Reynolds numbers of the flows. It is found that the dissipation of Is for all flow conditions can be expressed as an exponentially decreasing function as 

(3) 
where the coefficient 
represents the rate at which the secondary flow intensity decreases 
downstream of the elbow. The numerical value of 
is found to be 0.21 to obtain a best fit between the data and correlation presented in Eq. (3). Based on Eq. (3), 
dissipates to 10% of its initial value at approximately 11D downstream of the elbow. To investigate the effect of other geometric parameters, such as the radius of curvature, the results are compared with the previous velocity measurement of Al-Rafai et al. (1990) with LDA in bent pipe flow with two different radii of curvature, RC/D = 3.49 and 6.98, at Re = 34132.  Additionally, numerical simulations of the flow were performed by using the commercial CFD code Phoenics. Turbulent flows in the 90-degree bent pipes with the same geometric and physical conditions as in Al-Rafai et al.¡®s experiment are simulated using the RNG k-¦Å turbulence model and it is found that the current numerical method and the turbulence model give very acceptable results. Here, only the swirl intensities from the computed results are introduced and compared with other results. Table 4 shows the list of experiments used to characterize the swirl intensity of secondary flow. In the list, the radius of the elbow curvature is in the range of 2D to 7D, and the Reynolds number is from 30000 to 200000. In Fig. 19, the swirl intensities along the downstream pipes of the elbows are shown for the cases listed in Table 4. In the cases of curvature radii lower than or equal to Al-Rafai et al.¡®s smaller bend (3.49D), the swirl intensities show a very similar trend of decay even with different Reynolds numbers. However, in the case of Al-Rafai et al.¡®s larger bend (6.975D), it decays very quickly compared to the other cases. 




Table 4 Tests and their conditions used for study of swirl characterization. 
Test  Radius of elbow curvature (Rc)  Reynolds number (Re)  
Current  3D  50000 ¡«200000  
Sudo et al.  2D  60000  
Al-Rafai et al.  3.49D, 6.975D  34132  

The swirl intensities at the exit of the elbows for 
the five cases (one for Sudo et al.¡®s study, three 
for the current experiments, and two for Al-Rafai et al.¡®s study) are compared in Figs. 20 and 21. It is observed that the swirl intensity at the exit of the elbows has a weak dependence on the flow Reynolds number and a higher dependence on the radius of curvature of the bend. However, additional studies are necessary to provide a correlation between swirl intensity and the elbow radius of curvature. 


5. CONCLUSIONS 
In this study, experimental and numerical work on a turbulent flow in a pipe with a 90-degree elbow was performed. In order to select an appropriate turbulence model for the turbulent flow in the bent pipe, a quantitative assessment method based on hit rate was applied by using Sudo et al.¡®s experimental data. The assessment showed that the RNG k-¦Å turbulence model gives good results for primary streamwise velocity and secondary swirling velocity profiles compared to other turbulence models. The non-linear turbulence models showed a good predictability for the streamwise velocity components but they gave poor results in secondary swirling velocity components. As a future work, it is required to study the applicability of the non-linear turbulence models for complicated swirling flows. The experiments on turbulent flows in the pipe with an elbow with a curvature radius of 3D were conducted by varying the Reynolds number, and numerically simulated using the RNG k-¦Å turbulence model to evaluate the dependency of a flow after the elbow on the Reynolds number. It was found from the experimental and numerical study that there is a strong similarity in streamwise velocity profiles in the range of Reynolds number from 50,000 to 200,000. Using the numerical method and turbulence model selected from this study, the characteristics of swirl intensity after an elbow were examined. It was found that the swirl intensity defined in terms of area averaged tangential velocity decreases exponentially along the flow after the elbow, dissipating quicker as the radius of the elbow curvature is larger. It was also found that this dissipation characteristic depends weakly on the Reynolds number in the range of Reynolds numbers investigated in this study and strongly on the bend curvature. The swirl intensities at the exit of the elbows also display similar characteristics. 


REFERENCE 
1. 
Al-Rafai WN, Tridimas Y D, Woolley NH (1990). A study of turbulent flows in pipe bends. Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science 204:399-408. 

2. 
Chen YS, Kim SW (1987). Computation of Turbulent Flows Using an Extended k-. Turbulence Closure Model. NASA CR-179204 USA. 

3. 
Chigier NA, Beer J M (1964). Velocity and static pressure distribution in swirling air jets issuing from annular and divergent nozzles. Journal of Basic Engineering 4:788-796. 

4. 
Hellstrom LHO, Sinha A, Smits AJ (2011). Visualizing the very-large-scale motions in turbulent pipe flow. Physics of Fluids 23:011703. 

5. 
Homicz GF (2004), Computational Fluid Dynamic Simulations of Pipe Elbow Flow. SAND Report, SAND2004-3467, USA. 

6. 
Lam CKG, Bremhorst KA (1981). Modified form of k-¦Å model for predicting wall turbulence. ASME Journal of Fluids and Engineering 103:456-460.  

7. 
Launder BE, Sharma BI (1974). Application of the energy dissipation model of turbulence to the calculation of flow near a spinning disk. Letters in Heat and Mass Transfer 1(2):131-138. 


8. Lien FS, Leschziner MA (1993). Computational modeling of 3D turbulent flow in S-diffuser and transition ducts. Engineering Turbulence Modeling and Experiments 2 (Edited by W. Rodi and F. Martelli), p. 217, Elsevier Science Publishers. 
9. 
Lien FS, Chen WL, Leschziner MA (1996). Low-Reynolds-number eddy-viscosity modeling based on non-linear stress-strain/vorticity relations. Proc. 3rd Symposium on Engineering Turbulence Modeling and Measurements, 27-29 May, Crete, Greece, 91-100. 

10. 
Menter FR (1994). Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering applications. AIAA Journal 32(8):1598¨C1605. 

11. 
OpenCFD (2012). OpenFOAM: The Open-source CFD toobox, programmer¡®s guide 2.1.  

12. 
Rahimzadeh H, Maghsoodi R, Sakardeh H, Tavakkol S (2012). Simulating flow over spillways by using different turbulence models. Engineering Applications of Computational Fluid Mechanics 6(1):100-109. 


13. 
Shih TH, Zhu J (1993). A Realizable Reynolds Stress Algebraic Equation Model. NASA TM-105993, ICOMP-92-27. 

14. 
Shih TH, Liou WW, Shabbir A, Zhu J (1995). ¨DA new k-¦Å eddy-viscosity model for high Reynolds number turbulent flows¡ªModel development and validation. Computers and Fluids 24(3):227-238. 

15. 
Sudo K, Sumida M, Hibara H (1998). Experimental investigation on turbulent flow in a circular- sectioned 90-degree bend. Experiments in Fluids 25:42-49. 

16. 
Tanaka M, Ohshima H, Monji H (2009). Numerical investigation of flow structure in pipe elbow with large eddy simulation approach. Proceedings of the ASME 2009 Pressure Vessels and Piping Division Conference PVP2009, July 26-30, Prague, Czech Republic, PVP-77598. 

17. 
Weske JR, (1948). Experimental Investigation of Velocity Distributions Downstream of Single Duct Bends. NACA TN-1471, USA. 

18. 
Yadav MS (2013). Interfacial Area Transport across Vertical Elbows in Air-water Two-phase Flow. Ph.D thesis, PSU, USA. 

19. 
Yakhot V, Orszag SA (1986). 

20. 
Yamano H, Tanaka M, Ono A, Murakami T, Iwamoto Y, Yuki K, Sago H, Hayakawa S (2009). Unsteady elbow pipe flow to develop a flow-induced vibration evaluation methodology. Int. Conf. on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles, Kyoto, Japan, 291-292. 

21. 
Zagarola MV, Smits AJ (1997). Scaling of the mean velocity profile for turbulent pipe flow. Physics Review Letters 78:239-242. 


Renormalization  group  analysis  of  
turbulence:  I. Basic  Theory.  Journal  of  
Scientific Computing 1(1):1-51.  





