Revisiting diacetyl and acetic acid ?ames: The role of the ketene + OH reaction
ABSTRACT
The mechanism of the reaction of ketene with hydroxyl radical has been studied by ab initio CCSD(T) F12/cc-pVQZ-F12//B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) calculations of the potential energy surface. Temperature and pressure-dependent reaction rate constants have been computed using the RRKM-Master Equation and transition state theory methods in the temperature range of 300每3000 K and in the pressure range of 0.01每100 atm. Three main channels have been analyzed: through direct abstraction of H atoms or starting with OH addition to the terminal carbon and to the central carbon atoms. Major products identi?ed agree with the recent theoretical studies, however, signi?cant difference was found with the rate constants derived by Xu et al. and Cavallotti et al. To investigate the impact of the choice of reactions between CH2CO and OH radicals on the predicted burning velocities of the ?ames sensitive to ketene chemistry, namely diacetyl and acetic acid ?ames, a detailed kinetic mechanism was updated with pertinent reactions suggested in the literature. Then the rate constants of four most important product channels of reaction CH2CO + OH forming HCCO + H2O, CH2OH + CO, CH3 + CO2 and CH2COOH from the present and from the recent theoretical studies were tested. Good agreement with the burning velocities of diacetyl + air ?ames was found for the present model, while the expressions from the literature underestimate them. On the contrary, any combination of the rate constants of reactions between ketene and hydroxyl radical overpredicts burning velocities of acetic acid + air ?ames, which strongly indicates that the kinetic model of acetic acid is most probably incomplete and requires consideration of additional reactions.
INTRODUCTION
A common feature of combustion chemistry of diacetyl, (butane-2,3-dione, (CH3CO)2), and acetic acid, CH3CO2H, is the formation of signi?cant concentrations of ketene that allows for pinpointing important aspects of CH2CO conversion through experimental and theoretical analysis of pertinent reactions. Therefore, several studies focusing on reactivity of diacetyl and acetic acid have been performed quite recently and kinetic mechanisms including updated ketene chemistry have been developed. Earlier analyses of high-temperature diacetyl reactions focused on its pyrolysis until the ?rst ?ame study by Christensen and Konnov. Yang et al. investigated dissociation of (CH3CO)2 in a shock tube and determined pressure-dependent rate constant of the initial decomposition step. Moreover, a kinetic model for diacetyl pyrolysis has been proposed aiming at prediction of formation of methyl radicals in shock tube kinetic studies. This mechanism was extended by reactions of diacetyl oxidation to calculate burning velocity of diacetyl + air ?ames measured using the heat ?ux method. Particular attention in that study was paid to updates of ketene sub-mechanism and its validation by comparison with available experimental data on ketene pyrolysis and oxidation. The model closely reproduced burning velocity in lean and rich mixtures while underpredicted it in stoichiometric and slightly rich ?ames. The focus of the recent work of Zhang et al. was on methyl-related carbon chain growth reactions during pyrolysis of diacetyl from low to high pressures. The sub-mechanism for (CH3CO)2 decomposition was very similar to that suggested by Yang et al. One important mistake, which originates from the misprint in was spotted by Zhang et al. in the low-pressure rate constant of reaction implemented in the model of Christensen and Konnov. Most recently Sun et al. investigated diacetyl ?ame structure at low pressure using probe sampling and time-of-?ight mass spectrometer. They performed theoretical calculations of several important abstraction rate constants and introduced pressure-dependent reaction of decomposition which in other models was assumed to be instantaneous.
Sun et al. also improved the model proposed earlier implementing several rate constants relevant to diacetyl and acetic acid decomposition calculated in their earlier study. The chemistry of acetic acid is of importance in combustion of some oxygenated fuels, namely ethyl esters and acetates. These esters may decompose directly forming CH3 CO2 H, and therefore pertinent sub-mechanism suggested by Christensen and Konnov was incorporated into recent kinetic models for esters and further developed using theoretical calculations. Speci?cally, Cavallotti et al. calculated rate constants of H abstraction reactions from acetic acid by radicals and found them somewhat different from previous theoretical study by Mendes et al. Moreover, pressure-dependent acetic acid decomposition reactions and addition reactions of the key radical CH2 CO2 H + H have been obtained. Finally, decomposition of CH2 CO2 H and reactions between ketene and OH on the same potential energy surface were explored and pressure-dependent rate constants have been derived. All these updates will be explored in the present work.
Simultaneously, Xu et al. studied the same system of CH2 CO + OH and calculated rate constants of different reactions channels. Detailed comparison of the theoretical studies by Cavallotti et al. and Xu et al. reveals that predicted rate constants are not very close as will be shown in the following. On the other hand, in the study of CH3 CO2 H chemistry it was concluded that the mechanism performance in prediction of the burning velocities of acetic acid ?ames could be improved by revision of reactions between CH2 CO and OH radicals, while keeping its agreement with other ?ames studied. The goal of the present study was therefore threefold: (a) to calculate the rate constants of ketene + OH, (b) to update detailed kinetic mechanism of the authors by reactions of acetic acid and diacetyl suggested in the literature and mentioned above, and (c) to investigate the impact of the choice of reactions between CH2 CO and OH radicals on the predicted burning velocities of the ?ames most sensitive to ketene chemistry.
METHOD
Geometries of the reactants, products, transition states, and reaction intermediates in the reactions of ketene with radical OH have been optimized using the hybrid density functional theory (DFT) B3LYP and doubly hybrid DFT B2PLYPD3 methods with the 6-311G(d,p) and Dunning＊s cc-pVTZ basis sets, respectively. Vibrational frequencies have been computed at the same levels of theory to characterize stationary points as local minima or transition states, to obtain zero-point vibrational energy corrections (ZPE), and to be utilized in partition function calculations. However, the B2PLYPD3 method gave unrealistic imaginary frequencies for some transition states and hence, B3LYP geometries and frequencies were chosen for the evaluation of rate constants including calculations of partition functions and tunneling corrections. The connections between transition states and local minima were veri?ed and con?rmed by intrinsic reaction coordinate (IRC) calculations at the B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) level. All DFT calculations were performed employing the Gaussian 09 program package. Further, the B3LYP optimized geometries, which appeared to be very similar to those obtained at the B2PLYPD3 level, were used to re?ne single-point energies using the explicitly-correlated coupled clusters CCSD(T)-F12 method with the cc-pVQZ-F12 basis set; the MOLPRO package was utilized for these calculations. The CCSD(T)-F12/cc-pVQZ F12 approach closely approximates CCSD(T)/CBS energies and it is expected that the accuracy of the CCSD(T)-F12/cc-pVQZ F12//B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) + ZPE(B3LYP/6-311G(d,p)) relative energies should be within 0.7 kcal/mol or better. Two versions of CCSD(T) were tested, restricted open-shell ROCCSD(T)-F12 and unrestricted UCCSD(T)-F12, both based on the ROHF initial wave function. While for most structures the differences between ROCCSD(T)-F12 and UCCSD(T)-F12 relative energies were very small (within 0.1每0.3 kcal/mol), these differences appeared to be signi?cant for the critical entrance transition states TS(i1-i2) and TS(i1-i4) connecting the reactant van der Waals complex H2 CCO＃OH (i1) with covalently bound intermediates i2 and i4.
We selected to use UCCSD(T)-F12 energies for these transition states following the recommendation by Harding, Klippenstein and coworkers who carefully analyzed the performance of different ab initio methods for reactive potential surfaces. They found in particular that for radicals UCCSD(T) normally performs somewhat better than ROCCSD(T) providing a closer agreement with the benchmark full CI results or with the most accurate multireference CASPT2 values. In our calculations, the best agreement with the available experimental data (see Section 3.4) for reaction rate constants was found with UCCSD(T)-F12/cc-pVQZ-F12 single point energies for TS(i1-i2) and TS(i1-i4). T1 diagnostics was used to monitor whether the wavefunctions of the calculated structures possess a signi?cant multireference character. Only one structure, TS(i1-P1) for direct H abstraction by OH to form H2 O, was found with a large T1 diagnostics value exceeding 0.03. Therefore, for this structure we performed muti-reference perturbation theory CASPT2 calculations with the active space including 17 electrons distributed on 13 orbitals (17,13); this active space contained all valence electrons and all valence orbitals (23,19) excluding those corresponding to C每H and O每H bonds and respective antibonding orbitals (6,6). The multistate CASPT2 calculations included 3 electronic states of the species considered, i.e., the CH2 CO + OH super molecule, i1, and TS(i1-P1). The use of the IPEA shift of 0.25 and the standard MOLPRO level shift of 0.2 in the CASPT2 calculations did not affect the relative energies signi?cantly. The CASPT2(17,13) calculations were carried out with the cc-pVTZ and cc-pVQZ basis sets and the energy was then extrapolated to the complete basis set (CBS) limit using the two-point extrapolation:
In order to determine the relative energy of TS(i1-P1), the CASPT2(17,13)/CBS calculations were also carried out for the re actants, ketene + OH, considering them as a super molecule, i.e., as two non-interacting fragments (with geometries optimized for isolated species) separated by a large distance. Noteworthy, if the i1 complex instead of the super molecule is used as a reference in CASPT2 calculations of the relative energy of TS (i1-P1), the result is not affected. The CASPT2(17,13)/CBS barrier height at TS(i1-P1), 4.8 kcal/mol relative to the reactants computed using multistate calculations with 3 electronic states included, appeared to be lower than the values reported in the previous works, 8.7 kcal/mol at G3(MP2) and 6.5 kcal/mol at the composite UCCSD(T)-F12/cc pVTZ-F12 level with an MP2-F12 correction to the cc-pVQZ-F12 basis set. It should be noted however that the CASPT2 barrier height varies between 2.8 and 6.4 kcal/mol depending on the number of states included in the CASPT2 calculations and therefore the uncertainty of the this barrier height is likely ㊣ 2 kcal/mol. Temperature and pressure-dependent rate constants for the re actions considered were evaluated within the framework of RRKM theory in combination with the Master Equation approach (RRKM ME). The MESS code was used for the rate constant calculations in the temperature range of 30 0每30 0 0 K and in the pressure range of 0.01每100 atm. The rigid rotor-harmonic oscillator approximation (RRHO) was employed in partition function calculations. ※Soft§ vibrational modes, which can be characterized as intramolecular rotations and have low vibrational frequencies, were treated as hindered rotors. The internal rotational potentials for the hindered rotors were evaluated using B3LYP/6 311G(d,p) calculations. For the submerged transition states TS(i1 i2) and TS(i1-i4), variational transition state theory (VTST) calculations were performed, i.e., the IRC minimal energy reaction path (MEP) was mapped at the B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) level and single-point energies of the IRC structures were re?ned using the UCCSD(T) F12/cc-pVQZ-F12 method based on the ROHF initial wavefunction. The IRC structures were included as transition state candidates in variational calculations by the MESS package. Tunneling corrections using asymmetric Eckart potentials were included in rate constant calculations. As will be seen below, tunneling may play a signi?cant only at low temperatures for the H abstraction channel leading to the HCCO + H 2 O products since the other important reaction channels are controlled by the submerged transition states TS(i1-i2) and TS(i1-i4). The H abstraction channel does not con tribute to the overall reaction outcome substantially at low temperatures and hence more sophisticated treatment of tunneling was not pursued. Collision parameters, such as Lennard-Jones parameters needed for the calculation of the pressure dependence of rate constants were taken from Jasper＊s database for C 2 H 3 O 2 ( 汍/cm ?1, 考 / ?A) = (1762.424, 4.104) and N 2 ( 汍/cm ?1, 考 / ?A) = (68.0, 3.610). Since the entrance channel in the reaction of ketene with hydroxyl radical to form the van der Waals complex i1 is barrierless, we used phase space theory to generate its high pressure limit rate constant. The phase space theory rate constants were then combined with RRKM rate constants for other reactions on the potential energy surface (PES) in RRKM-ME calculations. The potential prefactor and power exponent were selected in such a way that the association rate constant for ketene + OH ↙ i1 at the high pressure limit was close to the gas-kinetics limit of ~2 ℅ 10 ?10 cm 3 molecule ?1 s ?1. However, the actual values of the 
association rate constant and the rate constant for the reverse re action of dissociation of i1 back to the reactants are not relevant at considered temperatures above 300 K when the equilibrium between the reactants and the rather weakly bound complex i1 is rapidly established. Under such conditions, the high-pressure limit rate constant e.g., for ketene + OH ↙ i2, can be expressed as Thus, under the conditions where the pre-equilibrium between the reactants and i1 has been established, the rate constant k (R-i2) depends only on the partition functions of the reactants Q R and the most important calculated rate constants were ?tted to modi?ed three-parameter Arrhenius equations. The RRKM-ME the oretical approach employed in the present study is capable of computing temperature and pressure-dependent rate coe?cients with ＆kinetic accuracy＊, i.e., with accuracies comparable to that of experiment, typically within a factor of 2 or better. The exception is the H abstraction channel, where the relatively high uncertainty in the entrance barrier height increases the uncertainty of the calculated rate constant, especially at low temperatures.
RESULT and DISCUSSION
At the ?rst stage of the interaction of the OH radical with ketene, an intermolecular complex i1 is formed, which further decomposes due to chemical processes between ketene and OH. Noteworthy, we found two possible reactant complexes, a planar structure i1 where a hydrogen bond is formed between H of OH and O of ketene and non-planar i1＊ with a hydrogen bond between O of OH and H of ketene. While i1＊ was found in, the present calculations show i1 to be very slightly (by 0.05 kcal/mol) more stable than i1＊. The reaction of ketene with OH can then proceed by the following 3 channels, where channels 2 and 3 have several different products: Channel 1 is carried out by the abstraction of H atom from ketene by the OH radical and leads to the formation of a water molecule and ketenyl radical. Channel 2 proceeds by the OH addition to the terminal carbon atom followed by the formation of ?ve different products: CO + CH 2 OH, H + OHCHCO, H + (HCO) 2, HCO + H 2 CO, and CH(HCO)OH. Channel 3 involves the OH addition to the central carbon atom eventually leading to the formation of two different products: CO + H 3 CO and CO 2 + CH 3. Figures S1 and S2 in the Supplemental Material show optimized geometries of intermediates and transition states along with their notations, which will be used from here on. The calculated total energies of all species at the B3LYP and CCSD(T)-F12 levels, ZPE, symmetry point groups, electronic terms, rotational symmetry numbers, the number of optical isomers, and imaginary frequencies (for transition states, TS) are assembled in Table S1 in the Supplemental Material. Note that we did not consider product complexes here, which were studied and presented in, since they are not expected to play a signi?cant role in the reaction kinetics under combustion conditions. Figure 1 depicts the pro?le of the PES. PES was studied earlier by Hou et al., Xu et al., and in part by Cavallotti et al., and the relative energies from these works are also shown in Fig. 1 for comparison. Our results are in a close agreement with 
the values from and except for channel 1 (due to a multireference character of the transition state noted above), and the present calculation method, CCSD(T)-F12/cc-pVQZ-F12 is generally more accurate than the G3(MP2) approach used by Hou et al. According to the present results, channel 1 proceeds via a bar rier of 4.8 ㊣ 2 kcal/mol. Channels 2 and 3 exhibit submerged entrance barriers following the formation of the van der Waals com plex i1. Channel 2 proceeds via an intermediate i2, after which it is divided into several subchannels. However, only subchannel 2a leading to the formation of CO and CH 2 OH passes through only one low barrier. Alternatively, subchannels 2b-2f exhibit high barriers in the 36.5每53.0 kcal/mol range and therefore are unlikely to provide meaningful contributions to the total product yield. As shown by rate constant calculations below, the only product that is formed in signi?cant quantities through channel 2 is CO and CH 2 OH. Channel 3 also has a submerged entrance barrier leading to an intermediate i4 residing in a deep potential well. Therefore, one can expect that i4 can be stabilized and thermalized by collisions or dissociate back to the reactants. This radical intermediate, if stabilized, can participate in bimolecular reactions with other molecules or radicals available or undergo unimolecular dis sociation, also preferably back to ketene + OH. After the formation of the intermediate i5 channel 3 diverges to several subchannels. However, subchannel 3a has a lower barrier than 3b and 3c, so it can be expected that the products CH 3 and CO 2 are likely to prevail along this reaction channel. Interestingly, while the relative energy of TS(i5-P7) computed here is very close to the values reported i and ( Fig. 1 ), the present energy of i5 is ~3 kcal/mol lower than the result in but identical to the value in  13 . The i5 ↙ TS(i5-P7) ↙ CH 3 + CO 2 dissociation channel is peculiar because both i5 and the transition state have planar structures, but different electronic states, 2 A§ and 2 A＊, respectively. IRC calculations without symmetry constraints con?rmed that TS(i5-P7) connects i5 and P7 via a pathway along which the planar symmetry is broken. In the meantime, an excited 2 A＊ electronic state of i5 is computed to lie 15.7 kcal/mol above the ground 2 A§ state. The overall reaction rate constants computed as a sum of rate constants of all reaction channels and branching ratios of individual products calculated at the atmospheric pressure are collected in Table S2, whereas Fig. S3 in the Supplemental Material illustrates the products branching ratios at different pressures. One can see that the main product in the entire considered range of temperatures and pressures is CO + CH 2 OH. Even at high temperatures, its branching ratio exceeds or is close to 50% up to 2400 K decreasing to 41% at 30 0 0 K. The hydrogen abstraction channel 1 producing a water molecule and a ketenyl radical gives a second largest contribution at high temperatures, with the branching ratio of about 21% at 1500 K and 56% at 30 0 0 K. The dependence of the branching ratio of CO 2 + CH 3 on temperature shows a maximum 
of ~11% at 10 0 0每130 0 K and 1 atm. The branching ratio of the intermediate i4 (CH 2 COOH) increases with pressure and at 1 atm has its maximal values at temperatures 50 0每60 0 K and then decreases. The remaining products have negligible branching ratios. With this overall picture of the product distribution in mind, below we discuss calculated rate constants for individual product channels and compare them with rate expressions used in current kinetic models. It should be noted that in the recent studies some rate constants related to ketene + OH were not calculated theoretically, but were estimated through thermochemical methods, as will be speci?ed in the following.
Modi?ed Arrhenius expressions for the formation of the ketenyl + H 2 O products are presented in Table 1 and Fig. 2 illustrates temperature dependence of the rate constant of reaction CH 2 CO + OH = HCCO + H 2 O and compares the calculated ex pression with the literature data. As can be seen from the ?gure, the rate constants increase with increasing temperature. The calculated rate constant here is independent of pressure. The low-temperature values are particularly sensitive to the barrier height which, as discussed above, have a signi?cant uncertainty of ㊣ 2 kcal/mol. When the ＆central＊ value of 4.8 kcal/mol is used obtained by three-state CASPT2 calculations, the rate constant at 300 K computed here is a factor of 20.6 higher that the value obtained in. The difference between the two sets of values remain signi?cant at higher temperatures but decreases to fac tors of 4.9, 3.6, and 3.1 at 10 0 0, 20 0 0, and 30 0 0 K, respectively. On the other hand, the present rate constant computed with the 4.8 kcal/mol barrier agrees within a factor of 2 with the values obtained from the rate expression in above 700 K. Similar agreement within a factor of 2 is also seen with rate expression proposed in in the 90 0每220 0 K temperature range. The uncertainty in the calculated rate constant caused by the uncertainty in the barrier height is large at low temperatures up to 10 0 0 K. However, at these temperatures, the contribution of the H abstraction channel to the total reaction rate constant is small and does not exceed 0.1% at 300 K and is ~7% at 10 0 0 K. The uncertainty in the rate constant decreases at higher temperatures. For instance, at 10 0 0 K and above the values computed with the barrier heights of 2.8 and 4.8 kcal/mol agree within 30%. Alternatively, the rate constant calculated with the barrier height of 6.4 kcal/mol is factors 4.5每2.3 lower at 10 0 0每30 0 0 K but is close to the values computed Channel 2 can produce ?ve different product pairs including CO + CH 2 OH, H + OHCHCO, H + (HCO) 2, HCO + H 2 CO, and a stabilized CH(HCO)OH intermediate. However, only the formation of CO + CH 2 OH has a high branching ratio, the branching ratios of the remaining products are insigni?cant. Our calculations show that the rate constants for the formation of CO + CH 2 OH, H + OHCHCO, H + (HCO) 2, and HCO + H 2 CO are nearly independent of pressure, whereas the dependence of the rate constant for the stabilization of CH(HCO)OH on temperature at different pressures is shown in Fig. S4d in the Supplemental Material. Modi?ed Arrhenius expressions for the formation of CO + CH 2 OH, H + OHCHCO, H + (HCO) 2, HCO + H 2 CO and CH(HCO)OH are presented in Tables 1 and 2. Figure 3 illustrates temperature dependence of the rate constant of reaction 
CH 2 CO + OH = CO + CH 2 OH and compares the calculated expression with the literature data. Experimentally, only Grussdorf et al. determined branching ratios in the reaction between ketene and OH, which was later substantiated by ab initio calculations of Hou et al. Other measurements yielded overall rate constants at temperatures close to the room one. Since the branching ratio for CO + CH 2 OH at these conditions is above 80%(see Fig. S3) these values are also shown in Fig. 3.
One can see that our results for the rate constant of CO + CH 2 OH formation are in a good agreement with experimental data. As the temperature rises, the rate constant at ?rst slightly decreases up to 500 K, but then noticeably increases at higher temperatures. A similar trend at low temperatures was ob served earlier experimentally. This behavior can be reproduced only if the barrier at TS(i1-i2) is submerged, i.e., if this transition states lies lower in energy than the reactants. Restricted open-shell ROCCSD(T)-F12 calculations gave a slightly positive relative energy for TS(i1-i2), whereas the UCCSD(T)-F12 approach gave a negative energy. The inclusion of variational effects for this tran sition state does not affect the low-temperature values substantially but decreases the high-temperature values by 25%, 58%, and 75% at T = 10 0 0, 20 0 0, and 30 0 0 K, respectively. Although the energetics for channel 1 calculated in the present work is within 0.3 kcal/mol from the values obtained recently in, the calculated rate constants disagree by up to a factor of 6.4 at 300 K. The present values are higher and closer to the available experimental data. Both calculations here and in show a similar trend with temperature. The calculated rate constant of the minor HCO + H 2 CO channel is rather small and therefore it was not considered in other modeling studies. However, using input ?le for the MESS code provided in the Supplemental material to the work of Xu et al.one may retrieve the values of this rate constant. These values agree within a factor of 2 with our expression listed in Table 1. Channel 3 leads to the formation of two bimolecular products, CO 2 + CH 3 and CO + CH 3 O; in addition, the collisionally stabilized intermediate i4 can be also formed through this channel. The formation of CO + CH 3 O is insigni?cant, but CO 2 + CH 3 represents an important product. Modi?ed Arrhenius expressions for the formation of the products of channel 3 are presented in Tables 1 and 2. Note that variational effects for the submerged entrance channel TS(i1-i4) do not in?uence the calculated rate constants for channel 3 signi?cantly. The dependence of the reaction rate constants for CO 2 + CH 3 and intermediate i4 on temperature at different pressures is shown in Fig. S4 in the Supplemental Material. The reaction rate constant for CO 2 + CH 3 increases with temperature and decreases with pressure. The dependence of the rate constants for the formation of these products on temperature at the pressure of 1 atm is given in comparison with the literature data in Fig. 4. Again, the calculated behavior differs from the previous literature estimation but shows a reasonably close agreement with the results of theoretical studies. Note that Cavallotti et al calculated this rate constant at temperatures above 700 K. The different trend is observed for the stabilized intermediate i4 (CH 2 COOH); the reaction rate constant does not change or slightly increases with temperature at low temperatures (below 600 K) and decreases with increasing temperature at the temperatures relevant to combustion (10 0 0 K and above) as shown in Fig. 5. Also, the rate constant for the formation of i4 always increases with pressure. Estimated rate constant and theoretical calculations  11, 13  are also shown in Fig. 5. Cavallotti et al. calculated this rate constant in the reverse direction. For comparison, the rate of recombination was calculated using their reverse rate and thermo data for CH 2 COOH (also accepted in the present model) taken from. The present kinetic model consists of 1797 reactions and 162 species and is based on the most recent Konnov mechanism provided by Capriolo et al. with some important modi?cation introduced by Konnov. Speci?cally, the termolecular reactions associated to hydrogen oxidation, namely, H + O 2 + R suggested by Klippenstein and Burke were included in the mechanism; furthermore, transport properties for a large number of molecules and radicals were updated using calculations of Jasper et al. Reactions introduced and/or revisited in the present tudy are listed in Table 3 and described below. Note that several pressure-dependent rate constants are incorporated in the mechanism using PLOG function and without ( + M) notation, while Table 3 shows only expressions at 1 atm. 4.1. Reactions of diacetyl Zhang et al. recently investigated pyrolysis of diacetyl and largely adopted pertinent mechanism from Yang et al. They noted important mistake in the low-pressure rate constant of re action implemented in the model of Christensen and Konnov due to numerous misprints in the original pape; now this rate constant is correctly listed in Table 3. Using probe sampling and time-of-?ight mass spectrometer Sun et al. investigated the structure of a low pressure diacetyl ?ame. In the previous models for diacetyl it was assumed that CH 2 COCOCH 3 radicals formed by abstracting H atoms decompose immediately forming ketene and acetyl. Sun et al. introduced pressure-dependent reaction of decomposition. Thermodynamic data for CH 3 COCOCH 2 have been also adopted from Sun et al. Moreover, they performed theoretical calculations of important abstraction rate constants by H atoms ( R13) and CH 3 radicals (R14), as well as displacement reactions. It was demonstrated that introducing the latter reaction al lows for much better prediction of the acetaldehyde pro?le in di acetyl ?ame as compared to the model of Christensen and Konnov. For other abstraction reactions by C 2 H 5, O, OH, HO 2, and O 2 the same rate constants as suggested earlier were kept, however ketene and acetyl radicals in the products were replaced by CH 2 COCOCH 3. Finally, to evaluate possible role of displacement re action with OH, (CH 3 CO) 2 + OH = CH 3 CO + CH 3 CO 2 H (R17) 
it was included in the present model with estimated rate constant. 4.2. Reactions of acetic acid. Although the work of Sun et al. was focused on diacetyl ?ame chemistry they also proposed to implement several rate constants relevant to acetic acid decomposition calculated in their earlier study. However, Cavallotti et al revisited this system also theoretically and found signi?cant departure from the results of Sun et al. It was argued that the level theory used in is higher than that in, and therefore most of the rate constants calculated by Cavallotti et al. are adopted here. Only isomerisation and decomposition of 1,1-ethenediol not covered in yet included in our model with the rate constants previously taken from Clark et al. H abstraction reactions ( R24 )每(R32) were also presented in as forward reactions only, moreover, CH 3 CO 2 was assumed to decompose immediately, forming CH 3 + CO 2. These reactions were all made reversible in the present work and radical CH 3 CO 2 was considered as a product, where appropriate. Cavallotti et al. compared their calculated rate constants with the previous theoretical study by Mendes et al. and in most cases found differences within a factor of 2. However, considerable divergence from Mendes et al. was observed for H abstraction by H carboxyl group and for H abstraction by OH attributing these differences to the higher level of theory used i. For both channels of reaction with OH Cavallotti et al. showed in Supporting Information of that their rate constants are higher by a factor of 2.5每4. Regrettably, this Supporting Information contains two mistakes. First, the rate constant of reaction ( R24) derived by Mendes et al. is actually higher (by about 10%) compared to that of as shown in Fig. 6. The rate expression of reaction ( R29) listed in Table S6 of is also lower than that from  12  that contradicts to the good agreement between experimental data of Khamaganov et al. and the total rate shown in Fig. 4 of  11 . This contradiction was re solved by digitizing the rate constant of reaction ( R29) from Fig. S5f of  11 , which yields expression listed in Table 3 and shown in Fig. 6. The total rate constant of reaction CH 3 CO 2 H + OH derived in 11 is then in good agreement with available experiments at least up to 700 K.
High and low-pressure limiting expressions for reaction (R-38) obtained by Wagner and Zabel was adopted in the mechanism of Christensen and Konnov and in other models. Friedrichs and Wagner implemented frequency modulation spectroscopy to detect singlet methylene during decomposition of ketene in a shock tube. They summarised previous works, and suggested to use pressure-dependent rate constant of recombination based on RRKM calculations, which is adopted in the present mechanism. Reactions of ketene with CH 3 and CH 2 radicals have been investigated in our recent theoretical studies and all pertinent channels with calculated rate constants have been implemented in the present model. hey are included in the present mechanism for completeness that requires additional reactions of their consumption to make the model consistent. The last two species were incorporated in the mechanism of Battin-Leclerc et al. mostly with estimated rate constants. In the present model reactions of HOCHCO were added and sub-mechanism of glyoxal was up dated largely relying on the studies of Fa?heber et al. and of Friedrichs et al. The sub-mechanism of formic acid, HCOOH, which is formed in some reactions of these three species, was also updated mainly following the work of Marshall and Glarborg. None of these reactions affects calculated burning velocities, therefore the choice of their rate constant is presented in the Supple mental material. Modeling was performed using ANSYS Chemkin 17.0 software. The laminar burning velocity was simulated using the premixed laminar ?ame speed calculation module with multicomponent transport and thermal diffusion options taken into account. Radiative heat losses were also considered in the simulations since they may affect calculated burning velocities of slowly burning ?ames. The radiation model considers the radiation from CO 2 and H 2 O through an optically thin medium with absorption coe?cients taken from 62. The impact of the radiative heat losses on the calculated burning velocity was typically smaller than 0.2 cm/s. A grid independent solution was ensured by setting the parameters GRAD and CURV to values of 0.03 and 0.02, respectively, resulting in a typical number of grid points above 600 over the domain of 3 cm. 
In the following three models will be tested and compared with experimental data for burning velocities of diacetyl and acetic acid. Present Model I includes all reactions listed in Tables 1 每3. In Model II the rate constants of reactions calculated by Cavallotti et al. were implemented; all other re actions, thermodynamic and transport parameters were not modi?ed. Similarly, in Model III the rate constants of reactions (R1), ( R2 ), ( R4) and ( R5) calculated by Xu et al. were implemented. 
The laminar burning velocities of diacetyl + air ?ames at 1 atm were determined using the heat ?ux method in non-stretched ?ames at initial gas temperatures of 298 K, 318 K, and 338 . The measurements at 298 K with associated experimental uncertainties are presented in Fig. 7, while those for 318 and 338 K are illustrated in Figs. S11 and S12, respectively. The burning velocities were obtained over 3 non-consecutive days using two different installations as described by Christensen and Konnov and therefore presented by different symbols on these plots. Calculated burning velocities of diacetyl + air ?ames using the previous and present mechanisms are also shown in Figs. 7, S11 and S12. The model of Christensen and Konnov closely reproduced experimental results in lean and rich mixtures while underpredicted them in stoichiometric and slightly rich ?ames with maximum deviation by 2每3 cm/s. Models II and III predict burning velocities very close to the result of the previous model slightly di verging from it only in rich ?ames. Model I is in a slightly better agreement with experimental data over the entire range of equivalence ratios. It should be noted that the difference between Models I, II and III is only in the rate constants of reactions ( R1 ), ( R2 ), ( R4) and ( R5) between ketene and OH, which were not present among 
sensitive for diacetyl + air ?ames as was shown earlier by Christensen and Konnov or by Sun et al. To clarify which changes affect the burning velocity of di acetyl + air ?ames the sensitivity analysis was performed using Model I as depicted in Fig. 8. Since the models I每III are only differ ent by the rate constants of 4 reactions, the sensitivity spectra for them are very similar. Comparing previous and the present sensitivity spectra, one may note that among fuel-speci?c reactions 
displacement keeps its positive impact on the burning velocity of diacetyl. The rate constants of these reactions have been updated in the current mechanism based on the study of Sun et al. For ketene, only reaction CH 2 CO + H = CH 3 + CO appeared in the earlier sensitivity spectra with negative normalized coe?cients because it converts H atoms into less reactive methyl radicals. However, reaction (R2) forming CH 2 OH + CO emerges in the present analysis ( Fig. 8) because in Model I it has signi?cantly higher rate constant (see Fig. 3) comparing to the other models. It effectively competes with the reaction between ketene and H atoms that leads to a slight increase in the predicted burning velocity. Hence, one may conclude that thanks to these and other modi?cations implemented in the present work, Model I is suitable for calculations of the burning velocities of diacetyl + air ?ames. 
The laminar burning velocities of acetic acid + air ?ames at atmospheric pressure and initial gas temperatures of 338 K, 348 K, and 358 K have been determined for the ?rst time by Christensen 
and Konnov. These experiments were accompanied by di?culties caused by the corrosiveness of acetic acid towards the burner material. However, the procedure of normalization of the apparent burning velocity values by the well-known burning velocities of methane ?ames allows to circumvent these problems. On the other hand, this approach leads to additional signi?cant uncertainty that was evaluated to be about ㊣ 2 cm/s and includes day to-day variations observed over 3 non-consecutive days using two different installations. Therefore, the measurements at 338 K presented in Fig. 9, possess two types of experimental uncertainties: smaller ones based on standard procedures described elsewhere and additional error bars due to problems just mentioned and discussed indetails in 8. Similar plots showing burning velocities at 348 and 358 K are presented in Figs. S13 and S14, respectively. Different symbols on these plots and in Fig. 9 illustrate day-to-day variations of the measurements. 
The model developed by Christensen and Konnov overpredicted measured burning velocities of acetic acid + air ?ames by about 3 cm/s that exceeded evaluated experimental uncertainty of ㊣ 2 cm/s. Modi?cations implemented in the present work and ap plied in Models I每III lead to divergent behavior as illustrated in Figs. 9, S13 and S14. Models II and III are closer to the experimental data in rich ?ames as compared to the previous mode 8 . Present Model I, however, still predicts higher burning velocities than the measurements by about 3每3.5 cm/s, which is certainly associated with different rate constants of reactions ( R1 ), ( R2 ), ( R4) and ( R5 ). To elucidate reactions responsible for the differences observed, the sensitivity analysis was performed using Model I as shown in Fig. 10. Similar to the previous analysis 8 it was found that the calculated burning velocities are mostly governed by C1 chemistry typical for all hydrocarbons and by reactions of ketene. Thus, implementation of different C0-C2 reaction subsets may lead to no table changes in the predicted burning velocities as it was demonstrated by Cavallotti et al. using various versions of the POLIMI model. Furthermore, reactions ( R1) and ( R2 ), which in the present Model I have largely different rate constants than those in Mod els II and III (see Figs. 2 and 3) directly contribute to the overprediction of the burning velocities. The differences between our calculated rate constants and previous works have been dis cussed above and can be attributed to the higher level of theory implemented in the present study for reaction ( R1 ). Reaction ( R5) not visible in Fig. 8 appears in the sensitivity spectra of acetic acid ?ames ( Fig. 10) because in the reverse direction it constitutes important channel of CH 2 COOH decomposition leading to formation of signi?cant concentrations of ketene in these ?ames. 
The calculated burning velocities can be decreased by increasing the rate constants of reactions having small negative sensitivity coe?cients. Cavallotti et al. estimated the uncertainty of their rate constants of a factor of 2 or better. However, multiplication of them by this factor is not su?cient to match experimental data and it was not implemented in the present model.
Summarizing these different options and taking into account that majority of reactions of ketene and of acetic acid have been re?ned using theoretical calculations and can hardly be changed signi?cantly, one may support the opinion of Cavallotti et al. that kinetic model of acetic acid is most probably incomplete and requires consideration of de?cient reactions of the CH 2 COOH radical. Indeed, its reactions with other radicals could provide additional chain termination reducing calculated burning velocity and modifying the balance of the intermediate products observed in several attempts to model acetic acid ?ame structure investigated by Leplat and Vandooren.
CONCLUSION
The present work was motivated by the need of updating and improving kinetic sub-mechanism of ketene, which is important for combustion modeling of hydrocarbons and oxygenated species. Direct comparison of the recent theoretical studies by Cavallotti et al. and by Xu et al. reveals that predicted rate constants of the reaction of ketene with hydroxyl radical are notably different. To resolve this ambiguity ab initio CCSD(T)-F12/cc-pVQZ- F12//B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) calculations of the potential energy surface for CH2 CO + OH have been performed. Temperature- and pressure- dependent reaction rate constants have been computed using the RRKM-Master Equation and transition state theory methods in the temperature range of 300每3000 K and in the pressure range of 0.01每100 atm.
Then the rate constants of four most importan product channels of reaction CH2 CO+OH forming HCCO + H2O (R1), CH2 OH + CO (R2), CH3 + CO2 (R4) and CH2 COOH (R5) from the present and from the recent theoretical studies were assessed. The differences between our calculated rate constants and previous works can be attributed to the higher level of theory implemented in the present study for reaction (R1).
Ketene is known to be important intermediate in high- temperature chemistry of diacetyl and acetic acid ?ames. To investigate the impact of the choice of reactions between CH2 CO and OH radicals on the predicted burning velocities of these ?ames, detailed kinetic mechanism was updated with pertinent reactions suggested in the literature. Furthermore, the rate constants of four most important product channels of reaction CH2 CO+OH from the present work and from the theoretical studies by Cavallotti et al. and by Xu et al. were tested and compared with available data for the burning velocities of diacetyl and acetic acid ?ames. Good agreement with the burning velocities of diacetyl + air ?ames was found for the present model, while the expressions from the literature underestimate them. On the contrary, any com- bination of the rate constants of reactions between ketene and hydroxyl radical overpredicts burning velocities of acetic acid + air ?ames, which strongly indicates that kinetic model of acetic acid is most probably incomplete and requires consideration of additional reactions.
