Hydrogen production by  Zhundong coal gasification in supercritical water
Hui Jin*, Yunan Chen, Zhiwei Ge, Shanke Liu, Changsheng Ren, Liejin Guo
a b s t r a c t
The high sodium content of  Zhundong coal restricts its application in  direct combustion and supercritical water gasification is  a promising clean and efficient coal conversion technology. To obtain the gasification and sodium distribution characteristics of Zhundong coal in  supercritical water, experimental investigations were conducted in  autoclaves and supercritical water fluidized bed reactors. The experimental results showed that as the concentration of  Zhundong coal slurry decreased or  the residence time increased, more sodium was released from the solid phase in  autoclaves. Carbon gasification efficiency of more than 95% was obtained with the coal slurry of  30 wt%~40 wt%  in  the fluidized bed reactor. Less  than 0.07% sodium was released from the reactor, in other words, most of the sodium remaining could be  collected and caused no  pollution and fouling problems for downstream process. Supercritical water fluidized bed reactor appeared to  be a promising reactor for  supercritical water gasification of Zhundong coal.
Introduction

Coal  accounts for  the main part of energy resources in China and will  play a dominant role in  the next decades [1]. Direct combustion of coal in  the gas  phase has caused serious environmental pollution and safety problems. Zhundong coalfield has huge exploitable reserves of  164  Gt  [2,3],  how- ever, direct combustion of Zhundong coal is restricted for  its high alkali metal content. Because alkali metal lowers the ash fusion temperature and leads to  serious fouling and slagging on  the boiler water wall quickly [4e8].
Efficient and clean Zhundong coal utilization method is urgently needed and advanced coal conversion methods such as pyrolysis or  gasification were investigated  [9,10].  Much attention was paid to  the effect of sodium upon the gasification results and solid foundation was built for  the clean con- version  of   Zhundong   coal  [5,11e13].However traditional gasification and pyrolysis were conducted in  gas  phase, and sodium containing fly ash may exist in the raw gas. Therefore, special fly  ash separation device is  necessary to  prevent slagging problems. Supercritical water gasification technology attracts people's  attention due to  the unique chemical and physical properties of supercritical water [14e17]. Supercritical water provides a homogenous and rapid reacting medium for   clean  coal  conversion  [18e26]. The  main  conversion product is hydrogen, which is believed to  be  one of the most promising fuel in this century [27,28]. Moreover, the solubility of  inorganic matter in  supercritical water is  quite limited, which makes the  separation of  unwanted inorganic slats easier [29e33]. MODAR SCWO  [29] reactor used reverse-flow vessel to  recover the slats with a small steam at the bottom of the reactor. Vogel  [34] investigated the separation of inorganic salt in the process of biomass gasification to recover the salts as fertilizer and also avoid catalyst poisoning. Tester [35] discussed several commercial approaches that have been developed and/or used to control salt precipitation and solids buildup in SCWO systems. Cao [36,37] conducted supercritical water gasification of black liquid, and investigated the alkali recovery from supercritical water fluidized bed reactor. Therefore, supercritical water gasification might be  a good choice for  coal with high sodium content.
The element transformations were examined by  re- searchers. For example, the transformations of Pb, Mn, Ni, Cu, Zn, Cd and Cr during the supercritical water treatment of used tires were studied by  Chen [38]. Nitrogen [39e41] and sulfur [42e44] transformation characteristics were investigated in the supercritical water environment from the point of view of pollution reduction. Su  [3] conducted the gasification of Zhundong  coal in   supercritical water  with a  quartz  tube reactor to  omit the unwanted catalytic effect of  the reactor wall and obtained a kinetic model for  Zhundong coal gasification. However, the distribution characteristics of  sodium were beyond the discussion. This manuscript investigated Zhundong coal gasification in  supercritical water with auto- claves and fluidized bed reactor, and attention was paid to the sodium transformation characteristics.
Materials and experimental method
Coal sample
Table 1  showed the elemental analysis and the proximate analysis of Zhundong coal. It can be  observed that the moisture content is  as high as 17.1%,  which also restricts the widespread application of Zhundong coal [15,45,46]. The coal ash analysis is  seen in  Table 2 and it  can be  seen that the sodium content is 3.40 wt%  and potassium content is 1.05 wt %. The coal particle size used in experiments was in the range of 75e150 mm.Apparatus  and experimental procedures Supercritical water gasification reactions were conducted in high-through autoclaves for  batch experiments and in  fluidized bed reactor system for  continuous experiments. The autoclave material  is   Hastelloy  C276.   The depth and the effective volume  of  the autoclave are 20  mm and 10  mL respectively. The designed temperature  and pressure of are 750℃ and 30  MPa  respectively. The average heating rate inside the reactor was about 70 o C/min. More details of  the autoclave were noted in the reference [17].
The fluidized bed reactor has supercritical water as fluid- izing agent. A  distributor made of  sintered metal with an average pore diameter of 50 mm is located in the bottom of the reactor. The sintered metal is provided by Northwest Institute for   Nonferrous  Metal  Research.  Water  preheated   to   the desired temperature flows through the distributor to  form a fluidization state [47,48].  Zhundong coal-water-slurry  flows into  the  reactor  above the  distributor.  The fluidized bed reactor is  constructed of  316  stainless steel and the design temperature and pressure are 700 o C and 30 MPa respectively. The inner diameter of the reactor is 40 mm, and the height of the reactor is 1650 mm.

Analytical methods and data interpretation

The composition of the gaseous products was analyzed by gas chromatography  (Agilent 7890A)  with thermal conductivity detectors (TCDs) and high-purity argon was used as the carrier gas. The yield of gas  was measured by wet gas flow meter. The determination of the sodium content in  the aqueous or solid sample was conducted in inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, IRIS Intrepid II, Thermo Scientific). Carbon gasification efficiency and hydrogen yield were selected to  evaluate the gasification characteristics and defined as follows [17]:
CE (Carbon gasification  Efficiency) ¼ (total carbon in  the gaseous products)/(total carbon in Zhundong coal)  × 100(%)
Gas  yield ¼ (molar amount of a certain component of the gaseous products)/(mass of Zhundong coal)  (mol/kg).
Results and discussion

Effect of concentration

High concentration means high handling capacity of Zhundong coal in reactors, however, high concentration of feed- stock may be  overloaded for a certain reactor. The effects of concentration upon Zhundong coal gasification results were investigated in autoclaves as seen in Fig. 1. When the concentration of Zhundong coal was 5 wt%, the main gas fraction (fraction is based on volume in the paper) was H2 and CO2 and their fractions were 56.86%  and 40.75%  respectively.  As the concentration increased from 5 wt% to 15 wt%,  the fraction of H2 decreased to  40.74%  and the fraction of CO2  increased to
36.29%.  It was  worth  mentioning  that  the  fraction  of  CH4
increased obviously from 7.54%  to 21.26%.  It was probable that high concentration of  coal means  low  content of  supercritical water molecules surrounding reactants, therefore the methanation reaction (R-1) was enhanced for  CH4  production. The increase of CH4 also increased the lower heating value of  the gaseous product for utilization based on combustion.
4H2  þ CO2 /CH4  þ 2H2 O 	(R-1) As  the concentration of  Zhundong coal increased  from
5 wt%  to 15 wt%,  the carbon gasification efficiency decreased sharply from 45.72%  to  29.85%,  and the hydrogen yield decreased from 28.62  to  9.75 mol/kg. It meant that high concentration of  Zhundong coal decreased the amount  of supercritical water molecules around reactants. It can be deduced that the enhancement of heat transfer and effective catalyst were possible solutions to enhance the gasification process.
When the concentration of  Zhundong coal was 5  wt%,76.74%  of the sodium content in  coal was found in  the liquid phase and 23.25% of the sodium was found in the solid phase. The sum of sodium in the liquid and solid phase was not equal to  unity due to  the experimental errors. When the concentration increased from 5 wt% to 15 wt%,  the sodium measured in  the liquid phase decreased and the sodium in  the solid phase increased. It proved that low concentration was in favor of complete gasification and the release of sodium from coal into liquid phase.
Effect of residence time

Fig. 2 showed the influence of residence time on  gasification results. The fraction of CO was still within the range of 1%~3%. It was may be due to the catalytic effect on  the water gas  shift reaction as R-2 caused by sodium in Zhundong coal [49,50]. As the residence time increased from 10  min to  30  min, the fraction of H2 increased from 41.76%  to  45.29%  and hydrogen yield increased from 11.53  to  14.92  mol/kg and it proved that long residence time facilitated H2 production. As the residence time increased, the carbon gasification efficiency increased from 33.89%  to  37.96%,  meanwhile, the sodium content remained in solid phase decreased from 65.89%  to 29.47%.

Effect of temperature

Fig.  3 showed the effects of  reaction temperature upon the gasification results. It can be seen that high temperature was in favor of hydrogen production reaction. As the temperature increased from 650 to 750 o C, the carbon gasification efficiency increased from 19.89% to 31.46%. Because Kruse proposed that supercritical water gasification product distribution indicated two competing reaction pathways: One  pathway consisted of ionic reaction steps preferred at higher pressure and/or lower temperature. The second reaction pathway was a free radical degradation dominating at lower pressure and/or higher temperature [51,52].  Therefore, in  the case of  high temperature, more sodium in  coal were released from coal matrix because the gasification was enhanced. However, high temperature also led to low dielectric constant so as to restrain the release of  sodium from coal particles. To  sum up the above factors, the experimental results appeared that the distribution deviation was not obvious within the temperature range investigated.

Effect of potassium  carbonate

The experimental results above showed that the sodium in Zhundong coal  had  certain  catalytic  effect  upon  the gasification process in supercritical water. The effect of extra potassium carbonate was investigated and the experimental results were seen in  Fig. 4. It can be  seen by  comparison  of Figs. 4(a) and 1(a) that the fraction of gaseous distribution was quite similar. It proved that the amount of sodium in  Zhundong coal might be adequate for the catalyst for homogeneous reactions in  gas  phase. It can be  seen by comparison of Figs.
1(b) and 4(b) that when the concentration of Zhundong coal was 5 wt%,  the carbon gasification efficiency increased from 45.73  to  78.68%,  and the hydrogen yield increased from 28.62 to  48.86  mol/kg. It  proved that the sodium originally inside Zhundong coal was not adequate for  the heterogeneous car- bon gasification reaction, thus extra addition of catalyst was necessary.

Zhundong coal gasification  in supercritical  water fluidized bed

It can be  seen from the gasification result that the catalytic effect of  potassium carbonate was limited and the carbon gasification efficiency was  41.30%  when the concentration was 15 wt%.  The enhancement of heat and mass transfer is necessary for  further enhancement of  gasification reaction. Supercritical water fluidized bed reactor was famous for  the advantages for  preventing the reactor from shut-down by plugging [53]. Supercritical water fluidized bed reactor system was used to investigate the gasification results. It can be seen from Fig.  5(a)  that the gaseous products are mainly H2 and CO2, and the fractions were 49e52% and 32e35% respectively. The CO fraction was within the range of 2e3%. The gaseous product distribution was quite similar to  the experimental results by  the autoclaves. When the concentration of Zhundong coal was 40%,  the carbon gasification efficiency was 95.7%  and the hydrogen yield was 42.22  mol/kg. When the concentration was 30 wt%,  the carbon gasification efficiency was 97.3%  and the hydrogen yield was 48.56   mol/kg. The concentration of  the coal water slurry upon the gasification results of  supercritical water fluidized bed reactor was observed in  Fig. 5. It is emphasized that concentration for autoclaves referred to  the concentration in  the autoclaves. The concentration  for  the supercritical water fluidized bed reactor referred to  the concentration of  the feedstock (coal- water-slurry), and the concentration in  the reactor can be calculated by considering the dilution effect of the preheated water.
The carbon gasification efficiency was obtained in  the re- action temperature range of 620e660 o C. It can be  seen that carbon gasification efficiency of  Zhundong coal in  fluidized bed was obviously much higher than that in  autoclaves, and the reasons might be  as follows: (1)From the point of view of thermodynamics, higher reacting temperature causes higher hydrogen yield [47]. And  the heating rate is the most important factor for  supercritical water gasification of coal particle for a certain reactor temperature. When the heating rate of the coal particle is slow, the time for  the coal particle in  the low temperature  condition would be  long, afterward  unwanted intermediates will  be  produced to  form char, once formed, is difficult to  be  gasified [54e56]. In the autoclave, the temperature has almost the same heating rate with the fluid inside the reactor, while in supercritical water fluidized bed reactor, the temperature of  the coal particle was increased to  the bed temperature  rapidly. (2)The coal gasification reaction in  supercritical water is endothermic, and the water temperature around coal particle may be decreased, which has a negative effect upon the gasification process. While in  supercritical water fluidized bed reactor, the heat transfer around a coal particle is vigorously enhanced by the random motion of the coal particles. (3)In  the process of  the coal gasification, the products and intermediates are needed to be diffused and the reactant supercritical water is needed to  be  diffused towards the coal particles, otherwise, the unwanted polymerization reaction results in the formation of by-products such as char. The diffusion coefficient of organic matter or  gas  is not high enough in  autoclave compared with supercritical water fluidized bed reactor [48,57,58]. So it  is  obviously seen that the carbon gasification efficiency was far  higher than that of autoclaves. Besides, supercritical water has the potential ability to  separate the ash from the reactor, and the bed material is apt to  support catalyst [59]. Therefore, it is  believed that supercritical water fluidized bed reactor is a promising reactor type for  coal gasification in supercritical water.
Sodium distribution was also studied in supercritical water fluidized bed reactor. The sodium distribution was only measured in  the liquid phase since Figs.  1e3(c) showed good sodium balance to  prove the rationality of  the sodium measuring method used in this paper. It can be deduced from the  former experiments that  the  system was believed to operate stably when the accumulated gas   yield was linear with the running time [60]. When the system operation was in stable condition, the liquid effluent from the low-pressure gaseliquid separator  [60]  was collected with a measuring flask. The liquid effluent was diluted by 50-fold and measured by  ICP.  The experimental result showed that  only a small amount of  the sodium was carried away from the fluidized bed reactor and vast majority of  sodium remained in  the fluidize bed reactor due to  the limit solubility of  inorganic salts. In the case of 30 wt%  concentration case, 0.061%  of sodium was released from the  fluidized bed reactor, thus 99.939% of sodium remained in fluidized bed reactor. While in the case of 40 wt% concentration case, 99.932% of sodium was remained in the fluidized bed reactor. The deposited inorganic slats might be deslaged by lock-hopper online and the online deslagging device is  developing and related details will  be published later.
Conclusions

The gasification results  of  Zhundong coal and the sodium distribution characteristics in supercritical water were inves- tigated. The following conclusions were drawn:

1) Low Zhundong coal concentration and long residence time were in favor of the release of sodium from Zhundong coal. Reaction temperature  had  great influence upon carbon gasification efficiency but had no  significant effect upon sodium distribution.
2) Zhundong  coal slurry  with  40  wt%   concentration  was gasified  within   the   reaction   temperature    range   of
620 o Ce660 o C, the carbon gasification efficiency was 95.7%
and the hydrogen yield was 42.22  mol/kg. 99.932%  of  so- dium in Zhundong coal was remained in the fluidized bed reactor and could be removed as inorganic salts.
3) Supercritical water  fluidized bed reactor is  an effective reactor  for    Zhundong  coal  gasification  and   sodium removal.




