Title:Turbulent Flows in Curved Pipes: Recent Advances in Experiments and Simulations 
Abstract: Curved pipes are essential components of nearly all the industrial process equipments, ranging from power production, chemical and food industries, heat exchangers, nuclear reactors, or exhaust gas ducts of engines. During the last two decades, an interest on tur-bulent .ows in such conduits has revived, probably due to their connection to technical applications such as cooling systems of nuclear reactors (e.g., safety issues due to .ow-induced fatigue) and reciprocating engines (e.g., ef.ciency optimization through exhaust gas treatment in pulsatile turbulent .ows). The present review paper, therefore, is an account on the state-of-the-art research concerning turbulent .ow in curved pipes, natu-rally covering mostly experimental work, while also analytical and numerical works are reviewed. This paper starts with a historical review on pipe .ows in general and speci.-cally on .ows through curved conduits. In particular, research dealing with the effect of curvature on transition to turbulence, work dealing with pressure losses in curved pipes, as well as turbulence statistics are summarized. The swirl-switching phenomenon, a spe-ci.c structural phenomenon occurring in turbulent curved pipe .ows, which has interest-ing fundamental as well as practical implications, is reviewed. Additional complications, with respect to .ow through bends, namely, entering swirling .ow and pulsating .ow, are reviewed as well. This review closes with a summary on the main literature body as well as an outlook on future work that should be performed in order to tackle open questions remaining in the .eld. [DOI: 10.1115/1.4034135] 
1 Introduction 
Pipe .ows are the most common way to transport liquids and gases in technical and industrial processes. This is the case for transportation of oil and gas in pipelines and hot (cold) water for district heating (cooling), in all the types of process industry (such as pulp and paper industry, chemical plants, and nuclear power plants), for hydropower stations, etc. Also, for internal combus-tion engines, the so-called gas-exchange system is an intricate and compact system of piping where for a turbocharged vehicle, air is moved to and from the compressor to the cylinders through a pipe system and exhaust gases evacuated to a turbine and then through an after-treatment system and .nally to the exhaust. Also, biologi-cal systems rely on transportation of gases and liquids in ¡°pipelike¡± veins, arteries, and capillaries, such as the respiratory and cardiovascular systems in mammals. In all the aforemen-tioned cases, some parts of the piping system are curved due to the necessity to adopt to the geometrical or technical constraints of the system or to redirect the .ow. 
The .ow in pipes may be laminar, transitional, or turbulent depending on the geometrical, .uid, and .ow parameters of the system. The .ow itself can be steady or pulsatile, the latter is the case for the respiratory and cardiovascular systems, as well as, for instance, in engine .ows. For gas .ows through pipes, one may need to consider compressibility as well. Pipes themselves can have many different cross sections: round, oval, square, rectangu-lar, etc., the pipe wall can be rigid or .exible, smooth or rough, and there may be branches or junctions. In any pipe system, one would also expect to .nd bends of various angles and sharpness. Curved pipes or pipe bends are commonly associated with strong secondary .ow and increased pressure losses that are due to an instability set up by the centrifugal forces acting on the .uid as it passes through the bend. Also, cross-sectional mixing and heat 
1Corresponding author. 
Manuscript received January 29, 2016; .nal manuscript received July 11, 2016; published online September 19, 2016. Assoc. Editor: Herman J. H. Clercx. 
transfer may be strongly affected if a .uid passes through a curved pipe. 
As can be seen from the descriptions above, the .ow through pipes incorporates a vast area of various conditions. In this review, we will concentrate on aspects of turbulent .ows through curved pipes. There exist several reviews, book chapters, and books examining the effect of streamline curvature in general (see, for example, the extensive work by Bradshaw [1]) as well as speci.-cally within the area of pipe bends spanning from 1938 to 2008 [2¨C11], however, there exists quite substantial work done on tur-bulent .ows in curved pipes, which is not suf.ciently covered in the available literature. In the most well-cited2 
and extensive review on curved 
pipes 
[6], the authors state that ¡°laminar incom-pressible .ows will be our primary concern¡± and there is only a short section at the end of the review referring to some work on turbulent .ow as well as experimental work. However, especially in the last two decades, a number of studies exploiting advanced optical experimental techniques as well as (large-eddy/direct) numerical simulations (LES/DNS) have been conducted for the study of turbulent .ow characteristics in different bend con.gura-tions. In the present review, we will therefore focus on presenting state-of-the-art research related to turbulent .ow through pipe bends based on experiments and simulations and also give a his-torical background on original experimental and analytical studies relevant to the .eld. 

1.1 Some Basic Definitions 
Before proceeding, it is useful to give the de.nitions of a few basic parameters that are used when referring to the different stud-ies. The types of pipes, which will be discussed throughout the paper and are commonly used for numerical/experimental investi-gations in the main literature body, are the ones shown in Fig. 1 
along with their main geometrical parameters. 
2According to the Web of ScienceTM (www.webofknowledge.com), it has been cited today (April 2016) more than 200 times since 2010. 


Fig. 1 Different pipe con.gurations: (a) straight pipe, (b) 90 deg bend, (c) helix, and (d) torus, showing how some param-eters are de.ned. L, pipe length; D 5 2R, pipe diameter; Rc, cur-vature radius; c, coil radius; and 2pb, coil pitch. The torsion of a coil is de.ned as s 5 b=ec21b2T. 
We de.ne the Reynolds number as 
Re .qWbD=l (1) 
where q is the .uid density, D .2R is the pipe diameter (R being the pipe radius), Wb is the bulk velocity, and l is the dynamic viscosity. 
For curved pipe .ows, the so-called Dean number is often used, which takes into account both the Reynolds number and the effects of curvature. It was .rst introduced for laminar .ow and small curvatures by Dean [12,13], as will be discussed later on. This parameter took various forms in different studies through the years [14¨C16], sometimes based on the constant pressure gradient (mostly in theoretical/numerical studies) and sometimes on the mean velocity in the pipe (mostly in experimental studies) causing some confusion in the interpretation of the results from the litera-ture (see a discussion on this matter in Ref. [6]). Here, we de.ne the Dean number based on the curvature ratio c .R=Rc and the Reynolds number (based on the bulk velocity) as 
p...
De .cRe (2) 
The curvature radius, Rc, is here de.ned as the distance from the center of curvature to the centerline of the pipe, see Fig. 1 
The curvature ratio is within the limits 0 c 1, where for a straight pipe c .0 and for a sharp bend it is equal to 1 (sometimes sharp bends are referred to as elbows, typically when c is close to 1). 
Note that even though the Dean number is sometimes used in the literature for turbulent .ow (see, for example, Refs. [17] and [18]), c and Re should be viewed as independent parameters for (not only) turbulent .ows [19]. While in laminar .ow, the Dean number characterizes the integral quantities (for a detailed study on this matter, the interested reader is referred to Ref. [20]), the situation is, in particular, different for turbulent .ows where at least three different length scales play a role (pipe radius, curva-ture radius, and the turbulent viscous length scale). 
In this review, when referring to papers where the authors have used a different de.nition of the Reynolds and/or Dean numbers (for instance, using the radius as the length scale or de.ned the curvature ratio differently), we have recalculated them to adhere to the present de.nition.3 
It should also be noted that the notation 
3We have also rounded of numbers given to two signi.cant digits whenever needed. 

Fig.2 (a) Pipe bend with the cross-sectional plane A¨CA denoted as well as the outer and inner walls of the pipe bend. 
(b) Top view of the cross-sectional cut (A¨CA) at the exit of the pipe bend showing the de.ned Cartesian coordinate system. 
introduced here will be used throughout this review, unless other-wise stated such as when reprinting published .gures from the lit-erature. Finally, if not otherwise stated, we present results using the Cartesian coordinate system with z being the streamwise, x the horizontal, and y the vertical directions (as de.ned in Fig. 2) cor-responding to W, U, and V velocity components, respectively. Capital letters denote time-averaged quantities, small letters denote instantaneous quantities, whereas primed small letters denote r.m.s. quantities. 
Another important nondimensional parameter is the Fanning friction factor (f) de.ned as 
R dp
f .(3) 
qW2ds
b 
where dp=ds is the pressure gradient along the pipe. The Fanning friction factor is a way to nondimensionalize the pressure loss in a pipe of constant diameter, whereas the behavior of the curve in the f¨CRe diagram has traditionally been used to identify whether the .ow is laminar, transitional, or turbulent. 
Other parameters that will be useful to describe certain phe-nomena or .ow cases will be introduced in conjunction with their discussion. 
1.2 Outline. We start with a historical review on pipe .ows in general and speci.cally on .ows through curved conduits in Sec. 2. For curved .ows, we are here mainly referring to studies of laminar .ow. In Sec. 3, mainly experimental research dealing with the effect of curvature on transition to turbulence is reviewed although recently some DNS studies have been performed that give new insights. Section 4 
reviews both work dealing with pres-sure losses in curved pipes as well as turbulence statistics (mean velocity and Reynolds stresses), divided into sections with results obtained from experiments (Sec. 4.2.1), turbulence modeling (Secs. 4.2.2 
and 4.2.3), and DNS (Sec. 4.2.4). In Sec. 4.3, a spe-ci.c structural phenomenon is reviewed, namely, the so-called swirl switching which has interesting fundamental as well as prac-tical implications. Thereafter, we describe two additional compli-cations with respect to .ow through bends, namely, entering swirling .ow (Sec. 5) and pulsating .ow (Sec. 6). Finally, in Sec. 7, the main conclusions from the reviewed literature as well as suggested future work to be performed for turbulent curved pipe .ows are summarized. 
2 Historical Review 
Although pipes (or conduits) have been used to transport water at least since the construction of the .rst aqueducts in the Roman empire during the 4th century BC, the .rst scienti.c studies of pipe .ows are usually referred to around 1840 when Hagen [21] and Poiseuille [22] carried out experimental work on water .ow through straight pipes of various sizes to deter-mine the pressure losses, now known as Hagen¨CPoiseuille pipe .ow. Hagen observed that above a certain pressure head, the .ow became unstable, what he observed was probably the tran-sition to turbulence. 

Darcy [23], who was a hydraulic engineer, among others responsible for building the water supply system for Dijon 
[24], did similar studies. He investigated pressure drop in pipes of large dimensions (with a diameter of up to 0.5 m and more than 100 m long) where the .ow was certainly turbulent. He also studied the effect of roughness of the pipe walls on the pressure drop. 
Of course, a review on pipe .ows cannot exclude the pioneer-ing work on laminar¨Cturbulent transition by Reynolds in the late 19th century which was also published in his famous paper [25], where he de.ned the nondimensional number that we today know as the Reynolds number (Eq. (1)). Reynolds showed that transition to turbulence could not occur below a certain value, today known as the critical (or sometimes transition) Reynolds number. 
The .rst scienti.c notion of .ow through curved pipes of circu-lar and rectangular cross section is often attributed to the theoreti-cal work by Boussinesq [26]. His analysis showed that for laminar .ow through a curved channel of rectangular cross section, two symmetrical vortices exist. However, in some reviews, the work by Thomson in 1876 [27,28] is cited as the earliest effort to study .ows in curved pipes. Thomson4 
studied the windings of rivers and compared it with the .ow in pipe bends, however, he noted that a river (or curved channel) with a free upper surface in some respects is different from that of a .ow in a closed, .lled conduit. Thomson illustrated the secondary .ow set up in a river bend in a small laboratory model where he let particles show the inward motion at the bottom of the bend. His explanation of the particle motion was that pressure and centrifugal force set up by the curva-ture balance in the bulk .ow make an imbalance in the slow mov-ing .uid near the bottom and thus leads to an inward secondary .ow there. Nevertheless, even though usually neglected in histori-cal reviews on curved pipe .ows, the .rst work¡ªto the best of our knowledge¡ªdealing with .ow in curved pipes was the one by Weisbach in 1855 [30], who performed experiments to determine the pressure drop in sharp bends. 
Experiments in a curved pipe were also performed a bit later by Williams et al. [31] showing for the .rst time that the maximum mean velocity is shifted toward the outer wall at the outlet of a bend. Eustice [32,33] performed experiments, published around 1910, on .ow in various curved pipes and showed that the pres-sure drop increases as compared to a straight pipe but that the change of pressure drop observed in straight pipes at transition to turbulence was not as abrupt. The experiments by Eustice were followed by those of White [16], who clearly showed through pressure drop measurements that curvature stabilizes the .ow and that the transitional Reynolds number can be substantially increased for a curved pipe, compared to that of a straight one. 
Probably the most well-known name in curved-pipe-.ow research, Dean5 
(for a portrait see Fig. 3(a))6 
investigated analyti-cally the laminar .ow in a circular, curved pipe [12,13]by 
4James Thomson (1822¨C1892) was the 2 yr older brother of William Thomson, later Lord Kelvin, and was a hydraulic engineer, who became professor in Civil Engineering and Mechanics at the University of Glasgow and was elected as an FRS in 1877. A biography including his scienti.c writings can be found in Ref. [29], which can be accessed through the web for free. 
5William Reginald Dean (1896¨C1973) entered Trinity College at the University of Cambridge in 1919 and was elected a fellow of Trinity College 4 yr later. For some years, he was at the Imperial College London, where his .rst work on .ow in curved pipes and channels [12,13,34] was carried out in the late 1920s. In 1929, he moved back to Cambridge and stayed in Cambridge until 1952 when he was elected to the Goldsmid Chair of Mathematics at the University College of London from which he retired in 1964 [35]. Among other achievements, Dean was a co-winner of one of the most prestigious awards at the Cambridge University, the Adams Prize in 1950, along with G. K. Batchelor and L. Howarth, for their essays on the subject of ¡°Problems in the mechanics of solids and .uids (including elasticity, plasticity, and hydrodynamics).¡± The committee who awarded the Prize consisted of H. Jeffreys, S. Goldstein, and G. I. Taylor [36]. His last paper on curved pipe .ow was written in 1959 [37]. Generally, Dean has been described as a man ¡°with a well-developed gift of silence¡± and there is not so much information about his life and career apart from one paragraph and a portrait in the paper by Binnie [38]. 
6http://www.annualreviews.org 


Fig.3 (a) W. R. Dean (1896¨C1973). Reproduced with permis-sion of Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, Volume 10, 1¨C11, 1978 [34] Copyright by Annual Reviews, http://www.annualre-
views.org 
(b) A schematic of the Dean vortices as sectional streamlines. Originally published in Dean, W. R., ¡°Note on the motion of .uid in a curved pipe¡±, Philosophical magazine, 1927, vol. 4, pp. 208¨C223 [12]. Reprinted by permission of the pub-lisher Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://tandfonline.com 

assuming that the cross-.ow velocity disturbance was much smaller than the streamwise velocity and that c was small. He showed that the important parameter was Re2c (the square root of this is nowadays known as the Dean number, see Sec. 1.1) but also that a cross-.ow velocity .eld was established for small cur-vature ratios. In Ref. [12], the cross .ow pattern, if projected on the cross-stream plane, was identi.ed to consist of two counter-rotating vortex cells, where the .ow in the center plane was directed toward the outer wall. These vortices are today called Dean cells or Dean vortices in honor of Dean¡¯s work, see Fig. 3(b).7,8 
A .uid particle in such a .ow would move downstream along a helical path and this analytical result con.rmed the .ow visualization picture obtained by Eustice, although the variation of the pitch of the helix with velocity seemed to be opposite that of the experiments. However, his expansion allowed only small values of the Dean number or rather that Re2c=1440 <1tobe 
7http://tandfonline.com 

8The term Dean vortices are originally referred to the small amplitude laminar .ow pattern shown in Fig. 3(b), however, similar vortices that exist in turbulent .ows are also denoted as Dean vortices. 


Fig. 4 The referee report by Taylor on Dean¡¯s 1928 paper on curved channel .ow [34]. The report should answer six ques-tion (only the .rst .ve were answered). Reprinted with permis-sion by the Royal Society. 
considered. Since the expansion was only taken to .rst order this resulted in that the pressure drop along the pipe became independ-ent of the pipe curvature. In his follow-up study [13], Dean increased the expansion to higher orders and showed that an increase in curvature gives rise to a lowering of the .ow rate at a given pressure drop and again he found that the governing param-eter was the Dean number (squared). 
Dean continued his work on curved .ows by studying the curved two-dimensional channel [34]. In contrast to the .ow in a circular pipe, he found that the mean .ow in a two-dimensional channel could be without secondary .ows if the value of De was small enough (here, the pipe diameter is replaced by the distance between the channel walls). However, he found that the .ow became unstable to streamwise oriented vortices if Re2c >36. This work was published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series A, and the reviewer was no less than Taylor (see the referee report in Fig. 4). Curved channel .ow has been studied both through experiments and numerical simulations, speci.cally with regards to instabilities in the .ow (see, e.g., Refs. [39] and [40]), however, for curved pipes, there was no linear stability analysis available until recently with the work by Canton et al. [19]. 
Reviewing Dean¡¯s paper together with the concurrent work by White [16] may have inspired Taylor [15] to perform his own study of .ow in curved pipes.9 
He used .ow visualization by 
9It might be worth noting that both Taylor and Dean belonged to the ¡°Trinity Circus¡± [41], which ¡°meet on the golf course on Sunday mornings whenever it was convenient¡± and ¡°consisted of a small group of Rutherford¡¯s scienti.c friends, who at one stage or another were all fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge¡± [42]. 

Fig. 5 A drawing illustrating the tea-leaf effect. (Reproduced with permission from Einstein [43]. Copyright 1926 by Springer). 
injecting dye to determine the .ow structure in a glass helix and showed that the transition to turbulence was delayed to larger Reynolds numbers with increased curvature ratio. 
Flows in curved geometries caught the interest of many (famous) scientists, among them also Albert Einstein [43], who discussed .ows related to meandering of rivers. In his paper, he illustrated the centrifugal effect by the well-known tea-leaf obser-vation, i.e., that tea-leaves in a cup, if stirred into rotating motion, end up in the central part of the bottom due to the secondary motion set up by a centrifugal imbalance in the boundary layer at the bottom (see Fig. 5). 
Adler [44] in 1934 made measurements in curved pipes, all with a diameter of 1 cm, but with different small curvature ratios (c .0:005;0:01;and 0:02). The .ow medium was water, and a Pitot tube was used to measure velocity pro.les along seven dif-ferent chords on one side of the pipe (including the symmetry line of the pipe). The measurements were done for both laminar and turbulent conditions. From these measurements, he was also able to construct contour plots of the streamwise velocity. The contour plots all show the crest-shaped form that we associate with a sym-metric vortex pair. A year later, Wattendorf [45] measured mean velocities and pressure of fully developed turbulent .ow in a curved channel between two concentric circular walls. 
Since the two early pioneering papers by Dean [12,13], many other combined analytical and numerical studies have presented the laminar .ow in curved pipes from the 1960s on, see, e.g., Refs. [14] and [46¨C48]. Smith [49], for instance, looked at how the .ow upstream the bend was affected and showed that there was .ow toward the side of the inner wall of the bend creating a maximum of the shear there. Dennis and Ng [50] showed that for high Dean numbers, a four-vortex cell pattern was possible in addition to that of two vortices, whereas Dennis and Riley [51] looked at asymptotic solutions for high Dean numbers. In all these studies, the Dean number was found to be the governing parame-ter, however, we will not go into the details here since today they may be seen as obsolete as laminar .ow solutions of the Navier¨CStokes equations can now easily be obtained numerically through other methods without any severe assumptions. 
3 Transition to Turbulence 
The transition from laminar to turbulent .ow in curved pipes is a subject that has been investigated to a limited extent so far. Most of the existing studies regard helical pipes, whereas the main conclusions until a few years ago were based on pressure drop data, in which case the onset of turbulence was identi.ed by a change in the slope of the Fanning friction factor¨CReynolds number diagram. However, only a few studies give insight into how the transition is occurring. 
Early studies indicated that the transition to turbulence in a curved pipe appears at a lower Reynolds number when compared to a straight pipe. However, Dean [13] explained in his .rst ana-lytical work that the increase in resistance in a curved pipe hap-pens due to the secondary .ow, whereas Eustice [32] remarked that there is no critical Reynolds number for coiled pipes. Since the experimental studies by Taylor [15] and White [16] in helical 



Fig. 6 Data from the experiments by Taylor [15] and White [16] in helical pipes. 1 Speed at which White¡¯s curve indicates ¡°.rst appearance¡± of turbulence. These values were shortly after con.rmed through the experiments by Adler [42]. . Lowest speed at which the .ow appears completely turbulent accord-ing to Taylor¡¯s data. Highest speed at which the .ow is ¡°quite steady,¡± according to Taylor. The pipe diameter and curvature diameter are given as d and D, respectively, in the .gure (hence their ratio yields c). Reprinted with permission from Taylor [15]. Copyright 1929 by the Royal Society. 
pipes and by Adler [44] in curved pipes, it was made clear though that the onset of turbulence in curved pipes happens at a higher Reynolds number than in straight pipes, which is demonstrated in Fig. 6 
(taken from the work by Taylor [15] on transition to turbu-lence in coiled pipes). 
In fact, White [16] showed that for Reynolds numbers between 102 <Re <6 103, the resistance of a curved pipe (c .0:02) becomes progressively higher than for a straight pipe as Re increases and at Re .6 103, the .ow resistance was 2.9 times higher for the curved pipe. Similarly, Taylor [15] introduced dye through a small hole in a helical glass pipe and observed through .ow visualizations that a steady streamline motion persisted for a Reynolds number which was 2.8 times higher than the critical Reynolds number for straight pipes. These observations are sum-marized in Berger et al. [6] stating that the critical Reynolds num-ber for a curved tube might be larger by a factor of two or more compared to the one for a straight pipe (which is typically equal to Re .2 103). Moreover, as described in Ref. [4], it was anticipated from an early stage, that contrary to straight-pipe .ow, the critical condition in a curved pipe with small curvature depends on the disturbance level of the .ow, whereas for c >0:01 there is a unique critical Dean number for a given curvature ratio. 
An empirical relation for the critical Reynolds number was given by Ito [52], who compiled the critical Reynolds number given by earlier studies [15,16,44,53] together with his own data. The relation predicts a critical Reynolds number Recr .2:3 103 for c .0:001. Srinivasan et al. [54] also proposed relations for the critical Reynolds number for helices and spirals, which were later adapted by Ward-Smith and can be found in his book [4]. 
One of the most well-cited studies on transition in curved pipes is the one by Sreenivasan and Strykowski [55], who by means of .ow visualizations showed that the turbulent .ow entering from a straight into a coiled pipe becomes laminar and returns to its tur-bulent state after exiting the coil (see Fig. 7), see also Refs. [56] and [57]. The authors also observed that the .ow becomes time-periodic just before the onset of turbulence. The same observa-tions of relaminarization of the .ow in curved pipes were made later by Kurokawa et al. [58], who studied the laminarization of low Reynolds number turbulent .ow in curved and helically coiled pipes by means of smoke visualizations and velocity by means of hot-.lm anemometry measurements. The authors con-.rmed that the secondary .ow has a stabilizing effect delaying the transition to turbulence and observed similar to Ref. [55] that tur-bulent .ow in the upstream straight section becomes laminar as it 
Fig. 7 Visualization of relaminarization in coiled pipes for D 5 19.1 mm, Rc 5 90 mm, and Re 5 43103. Reproduced with permission from Sreenivasan and Strykowski [55]. Copyright 1983 by Springer. Caption of .gure in the original publication: ¡°Laminarization in coiled pipes. Pipe diameter 2a 5 1:91 cm, radius of curvature rc 5 9:0 cm, Reynolds number, R 5 4050¡±. 
passes through the coil. Sreenivasan and Strykowski are often given credit for being the .rst to make an effort to explain why the .ow in the coil is more stable than in a straight pipe. They showed that the upper critical Reynolds number (highest Re up to which the .ow remains laminar) measured at the end of 20 coils for 0 c 0:12 increases monotonically with c, however, the lower critical Reynolds number (the lowest Re at which the .ow is fully turbulent) reaches a maximum value and then suddenly drops. They also remarked that the .ow in the downstream straight section from the coil remains laminar for higher Re com-pared to the upstream straight pipe section. In another important study, Webster and Humphrey [59] found by means of laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) measurements that periodic low-frequency perturbation waves arose at a Reynolds number Re .5 103 for a helical coil and c .0:054; a result that was later con.rmed 
by 
numerical 
simulations 
and 
.ow 
visualizations 
[60]. 
Today, it is generally known that the transition process from laminar to turbulent .ow in a curved pipe occurs more gradually as compared to a straight pipe (where the transition is known to happen abruptly in most cases). Recent DNS and experimental studies in helical and toroidal pipes have shown more speci.cally that the transition process can include many stages. The .rst study aiming to study the instability of the .ow is the one by Di Piazza and Ciofalo [61], who performed DNS in a torus for c .0:1 and 
0.3. The authors found that for c .0:1, there is a direct transition from steady to quasi-periodic .ow with symmetrical traveling waves perturbing the .ow, whereas for c .0:3 the transition starts with a Hopf bifurcation (supercritical transition) affecting mainly the Dean vortices and for higher Reynolds number (Re >5270), a secondary Hopf bifurcation appears leading to a quasi-periodic .ow. Therefore, the .ow is changing from station-ary to periodic, quasi-periodic, and .nally a chaotic state accord-ing to the authors, albeit their DNS were later found to be inaccurate [19,62]. For small curvatures, there is a subcritical tran-sition like the one occurring in a straight pipe, whereas for higher curvature values, a multistage supercritical transition occurs as described in Refs. [19] and [62] and will be discussed in more detail later on. In short, as summarized by K€
uhnen [63], the key features of the transition in curved pipes are the following: the curvature has a stabilizing effect, the transition happens gradually as opposed to a straight pipe, stable traveling waves arise in the transitional .ow, and turbulent .ow from a straight pipe can be fully or partially relaminarized by passage through a curved (heli-cal) pipe. K€
uhnen et al. [64] are the only ones to have performed experiments (SPIV, LDV) in toroidal pipes by using a steel sphere to drive the .ow to study the transition process. 
Cioncolini and Santini [65] provided a criterion for the critical Reynolds number as well. For curvature ratios below 0.042, they observed that before turbulence sets in, the f¨CRe curve depicted a 


Fig. 8 Comparison of available experimental and numerical data with the neutral curve by Canton et al. [19]. The envelope of families F4S and F5A is shown with the black line and inter-sect at d 5 0:016 (which here denotes the curvature ratio, c), and the two dotted lines highlight their continuation. The data by Cioncolini and Santini [65], which refer to the .rst discontinuity in their friction measurements, the data from Sreenivasan and Strykowski [55] which they refer to as ¡°conservative lower criti-cal limit,¡± and that by Noorani and Schlatter [67] referring to sublaminar drag are also shown. The interpolants by K€
uhnen et al. [62] are also shown: with a dashed (blue) line the .t for the supercritical transition and with a dotted (blue) line the .t for subcritical transition. Reproduced with permission from Can-ton et al. [19]. Copyright 2016 by Cambridge University Press. 
local minimum followed by an in.ection point and thereafter a local maximum. K€
uhnen et al. [62] performed LDV experiments both in toroidal and helical pipes with small pitch in order to detect disturbances in the .ow as the curvature ratio increased from 0.01 to 0.1 and found good agreement with the previous studies by Ito [52], Kubair and Varrier [66], and Cioncolini and Santini [65], who determined the critical Reynolds number from pressure drop data. From the critical Reynolds number¨Ccurvature ratio pairs, they could see a common trend of the critical Reynolds number to increase with increasing curvature ratio, although some scatter between the different studies is observed. Noorani and Schlatter [67] showed that close to Re .3:4 103 in a torus for c .0:01, a marginally turbulent .ow is established in which the friction drag reduces below the laminar solution for a straight pipe at the same Reynolds number, so-called sublaminar friction drag (see also Sec. 4.1). The most recent study on the matter which provided also the .rst instability analysis in a torus is the one by Canton et al. [19], where linear stability analysis and DNS were performed for various Re c. For the .rst time, the full range of curvatures (arriving to the upper limit of 1) was investigated 
(0:01 c 1). The authors con.rmed the results by K€
uhnen et al. [62] that the .rst instability occurring in a torus is a Hopf bifurcation (supercritical instability) as well as showed that previ-ous works indicated subcritical transition for curvature ratios below 0.02¨C0.04, see also Fig. 8. The authors found .ve families of eigenmodes (a family of eigenmodes shares similar characteris-tics) for different Re c pairs, see also Fig. 9; family F1A for high curvature and low Reynolds numbers which leads to a modi-.cation of the base .ow, a family of symmetric modes, F2S for medium curvature (0:54 c <0:64), a third family responsible for the onset of instability for 0:16 <c <0:48, and a fourth fam-ily (F4S) causing the instability for 0:016 <c <0:16. Finally, a family of antisymmetric modes was also detected for values of c below 0.0016. As it can be seen, previous studies agree on the existence of subcritical transition for very low curvatures (below 0.04), whereas the eigenmode family F4S was identi.ed in both Refs. [55] and [62]. 
4 Turbulent Flow 
4.1 Pressure Losses/Skin Friction. Since the pioneering work by Weisbach [30] in 1855, it is known that for turbulent 

Fig. 9 Neutral curve in the c ¨CRe plane (c is denoted in the .g-ure as d) formed by the envelopes of lines for 0:002 ¡ê c ¡ê 1by Canton et al. [19]. Each line corresponds to the neutral curve of one mode. Five families (black and blue) and three isolated modes (green) are shown. Continuous lines denote symmetric modes, whereas dashed lines indicate antisymmetric ones. The curves are not interpolated, i.e., they are segments connecting computed solutions with Dc 5 Oe1023T, and the uncertainty of the Reynolds number is 61024. Reproduced with permission from Canton et al. [19]. Copyright 2016 by Cambridge University Press. 
.ows, the pressure losses in curved pipes are higher than for straight pipes. This increase is due to centrifugal forces, which in turn (can) cause the .ow to separate at the inner wall of the curved pipe. The empirical relations put forward by Weisbach to express the increased pressure losses quantitatively for both elbow and curved pipes remained for half a century a reference as high-lighted in Ref. [68]. The increased pressure drop could through the .ow visualization studies by Eustice [32] later be coupled to the appearance of the secondary .ow. Since then, there has been a great interest to determine the pressure loss coef.cient used to compute pressure losses from the presence of pipe bends [69]. For example, investigators such as Nippert [70] and Richter [71] (among many others, see, e.g., Refs. [72] and [73]) performed tests on curved pipes to determine the pressure loss as function of various .ow and geometrical parameters, whereas Wasielewski 
[74] investigated the pressure losses in the bend of circular cross section as a function of the bend angle. 
As explained in the introductory part of the paper by Barua [75], a radial pressure gradient in the curved pipe is required to balance the centrifugal force applied from the curvature. Nowa-days, it is well-known that in a pipeline containing a bend, there will be a pressure increase along the outer bend wall and a decrease along the inner bend, and that this difference persists for 
Fig. 10 Pressure distribution along pipeline containing a 90 deg pipe bend (c 5 0:27), where lu and ld denote the pipe length upstream and downstream the bend, respectively. The Reynolds number is here denoted as R, whereas R is the curva-ture radius and r is the pipe radius. Reprinted with permission from Ito [76]. Copyright 1960 by ASME. 


Table 1 Experimental studies on turbulence statistics of curved pipe. ows. The last column shows the position downstream the bend where the various authors obtained data and where the.ow had not recovered from the effects of curvature. 
Author Type of Inlet pipe Exit pipe Inlet flow Quantities Diagnostic Length at which the flow 
4 
and year Re 10 c bend length length condition measured technique has not recovered 
Adler 1934 [44] 0.85, 1.17 0.01, 0.02 90 deg W Pitot tube Rowe 1970 [90] 24 0.042 180 deg, S 69D Fully developed Pt Pitot tubes, Conrad tubes, yawmeter 61D Enayet et al. 1982 [85] 4.3 0.17 90 deg 5D 10D Developing W, w0, PstLDV 6D 
0
Azzola et al. 1986 [86] 5.74, 11 0.15 180 deg 54.7D 54.7D Fully developed W, Vzw0;v LDV 5D Anwer et al. 1989 [88] 5 0.077 180 deg 96D 96D Fully developed W, U, V Miniature hot-wires 18D 
000
w ;u ;v wu, uv, wv Sudo et al. 1998 [87] 6 0.5 90 deg 100D 40D Fully developed W, U, V Rotating hot-wire 10D 
000
w ;u ;v Pst 
wu, vw 
Pww, Pwu, Pvw Sudo et al. 2000 [84] 6 0.5 180 deg 100D 40D Fully developed W, U, V Rotating hot-wire 10D 
000
w ;u ;v 
Pst wu, vw Pww, Pwu, Pvw 
Fig. 11 Fanning friction factor, f, as function of Reynolds num-ber, where . is for straight pipe data, and is for coiled pipe data for c 5 0:00964 (data obtained by Ref. [65]). Laminar and turbu-lent correlations by 
Ito 
[52] are shown by ---(for straight pipe) and ¡ª (for curved pipe). DNS results by Noorani et al. [81] are shown for fully developed turbulent .ow (Re 5 5:33103;
6:93103;and 123103) in straight pipe () and curved pipe with c 5 0:01 (w). DNS from Noorani and Schlatter are also shown: laminar .ows obtained in curved pipes are indicated with , whereas the symbol . illustrates sublaminar drag of the .ow in weakly turbulent curved pipe with Re 5 3:43103 and c 5 0:01. Reprinted with permission from Noorani and Schlatter [67]. Copyright 2015 by AIP Publishing. 
quite some distance downstream the bend leading into loss of pressure at downstream stations. This is depicted clearly in Fig. 10, which is reprinted from one of the pioneering studies on pres-sure losses in bends performed by Ito [76]. This study, together with an earlier one by the same author 
[52] on friction factor rela-tions for a wide range of curvature radii and Reynolds numbers, constitutes benchmark work which has been praised by other authors (e.g., see Ref. [77]), whereas the formulas they provided have been validated in recent studies [61,65]. In the .rst work by Ito [52], several experiments were conducted in order to establish a correlation between the friction factor and the .ow rate, which is one of the most crucial aspects of internal pipe .ow from an engineering point of view. The author compared his results with previous works [16,44,53]. As remarked by Ito, earlier published formulas for the bend-loss coef.cient provided results with con-siderable disagreement with more recent experiments 
[30,71,78]. The reason for the failure of previous studies was attributed later by 
Ward-Smith 
[4] to that the entry/exit conditions were not care-fully controlled, and the de.nition of the pressure drop was not precise. For a list of early relations of the bend-loss coef.cient as well as their performance, the reader is therefore referred to the work by 
Ito 
[76]. The in.uence of the degree of curvature, curva-ture ratio, Reynolds number, as well as recovery length of the downstream straight pipe section on the total pressure-loss coef.-cient has been investigated by various authors, and the results up to the early 1980s are summarized in a book chapter in Ref. [4]. In an earlier work, Ward-Smith [79] even showed that for the same Reynolds number range, turning angle, and curvature ratio, the same formulas for the pressure-loss coef.cient apply for square-and circular-cross-sectioned pipe bends without any con-siderable differences in the results. 
More recent work on pressure drop is mainly done in helically coiled pipes, such as the one by 
Ali 
[80], where an extensive table (Table 1 
therein) was given with many of the pressure drop corre-lations available in the literature. A similar effort to gather all the friction factor correlations for turbulent .ow in curved pipes was done a bit later also by Vashisth et al. [10] (Table 8 therein). As apparent from the aforementioned references, most of the work done on pressure drop in curved pipes/coiled tubes considers 



Fig. 13 Contours of longitudinal mean velocity, scaled with the bulk velocity on the horizontal axis along a 180 deg bend and its downstream straight pipe section until a downstream loca-tion of z=d 5 5. Minus sign denotes upstream location from the bend. The angles along the bend are also indicated. Reprinted with permission from Sudo et al. [84]. Copyright 2000 by Springer. Caption of .gure in the original publication: ¡°Contours of longitudinal mean velocity W =Wa on the horizon-tal plane¡±. 
laminar .ow and either helical or toroidal coils. Turbulent .ow has been generally neglected in the literature when considering the determination of the friction law in curved pipes with only a few exceptions [16,52,53]. Recently, Ref. [81] studied the effect of increasing Reynolds number on the Fanning friction factor for a constant curvature ratio, c .0:01, and they surprisingly showed that under some conditions, the friction factor is not higher for the curved pipe as compared to a straight one, as commonly believed. In fact, both substraight and sublaminar (friction) drag could be observed in some recent studies [65,67]. The most recent friction factor correlations are summarized together with the ones by Ito 
[52] in Fig. 11, reprinted from Ref. [67]. 
4.2 Turbulence Statistics and Flow Structures. In the fol-lowing sections (Secs. 4.2.1¨C4.2.4), experimental and numerical work which have been performed on turbulent .ows in curved pipes of different types (but of circular cross section) are pre-sented and discussed. Figure 12 
illustrates some common bend shapes that have been used in the literature, apart from the ones already shown in Fig. 1. 
4.2.1 Experiments. Between the early 1970s and late 1990s, the main literature body on mean quantities (velocity and pressure) and turbulence statistics along bends (mainly 90 deg or U-bends, which are typical in practical applications) was created. Measure-ment techniques employed mainly include LDV and hot-wire ane-mometry, whereas wall shear gauges, pressure taps, and Pitot tubes have also been used. Turbulence models have also been uti-lized almost at the same time as the experiments, mainly the most common ones (standard k e or k x) but even more sophisti-cated ones, as it will be outlined in detail in Secs. 4.2.2¨C4.2.3. 
One of the .rst studies that provided turbulence statistics of a curved pipe .ow through experiments was the one by Adler [44], showing mean velocity pro.les and contours for Reynolds 


Fig. 14 (a) Mean and (b) r.m.s. streamwise velocity pro.les measured along the horizontal axis by means of a single hot-wire probe, for three Reynolds numbers (based on pipe diame-ter), Re 5 1:43104,2:43104, and 3:43104 at 0.67D downstream of a 90 deg curved pipe. Reprinted with permission from Kalpa-kli Vester et al. [141]. Copyright 2016 by Springer. Caption of .g-ure in the original publication: ¡°Reynolds number effect on the a mean streamwise velocity and b r.m.s. pro.le normalized by the bulk velocity¡±. 
numbers range Re .2 12 103. Weske [82] presented velocity distributions from hot-wire measurements in various bends of cir-cular, square, and elliptical cross sections where in most of them separation occurred at the inner bend wall. Detra [83] presented mean axial velocity contours for high Reynolds numbers up to approximately Re .2:5 106 for different bends (a 21 deg bend with c .0:02 and a 42 deg bend with c .0:04). 
Since those early works, a number of studies on turbulence sta-tistics in pipe-bend .ows have been conducted, and the main results that were commonly found by different studies include the fact that the mean streamwise velocity becomes higher at the inner wall at 30 deg angle (see Fig. 13 
for clari.cation of the angle posi-tion along the bend) and at which point the Dean vortices start to form [84¨C87]. The mean .ow has been seen deviating from the fully developed turbulent pro.le at upstream distances of approxi-mately 1D [87,88]. At 90 deg, the maximum of the velocity was found to have shifted toward the outer wall and remains so down-stream the bend. On the other hand, the r.m.s. of the axial velocity is higher at the inner wall and lower at the outer wall (see, for example, Fig. 14). With increasing distances from the bend, the mean velocity pro.le becomes more uniform and the strength of the secondary .ow decreases. However, a distance of more than 50D is sometimes required for the .ow to return to its fully developed state, even for small curvatures [87¨C89]. It should be noted that the mean velocity, turbulence intensity, and Reynolds stresses were found to be similar for both 90 deg and 180 deg bends up to a bend angle of 60 deg [84]. Thereafter, it is shown that the effect of curvature on the .ow is stronger for a 180 deg bend, and a longer recovery length is required. Some of the most signi.cant experimental works which have been conducted on tur-bulence statistics in curved pipe .ows are summarized in Table 1. These will be described in more detail in the following paragraphs. 

Total pressure (Pt) measurements by means of Pitot tube as well as yaw angles by means of Conrad probes/claw-type yawmeters were made by Rowe [90], along a 180 deg bend for Re .2:4 105 and c .0:042. The .ow at the inlet was a fully developed turbulent pipe .ow, and it was shown that the second-ary motion becomes strongest 30 deg from the bend inlet, whereas for larger angles, it reduced in strength until it reached a constant value at 90 deg, i.e., the .ow pattern remained unchanged after that angle until the bend exit and it was therefore found to have reached a fully developed state. The author also detected second-ary .ow reversal along the bend symmetry plane between 90 deg and the 5D downstream station. The total pressure contours did not even recover from the effects of the curvature at a distance of 61D downstream the bend. 
Some measurements were also made in 45 deg S-bends, which, as the author remarks, give increased heat transfer compared to other bends. Compared to a 180 deg bend, the fully developed state was reached faster downstream of the S-bend. In fact, almost fully developed pipe .ow was achieved at approximately 50D shorter distance for the S-bend. However, this work showed con-.icting results with Ref. [88] and has been criticized by later stud-ies [86] due to the in.uence of the probes intruding the .ow and measurement uncertainties. 
Later on, Enayet et al. [85] performed LDV measurements in laminar and developing turbulent .ows (Re .4:3 104) at dif-ferent angles and up to 6D downstream a 90 deg bend (c .0:17). The mean streamwise velocity pro.les between the laminar and turbulent .ow cases were compared, whereas for the turbulent .ow case the corresponding turbulence intensity as well as static-pressure variation was presented. It was shown that a negative streamwise pressure gradient at the bend inlet exists on the inner wall which is twice the positive gradient existing on the outer wall. Those gradients disappear at an angle of approximately 25 deg and for bend angles up to 75 deg, a uniform pressure gradi-ent is established on both sides of the bend. However, for larger angles than 75 deg and until the straight pipe section downstream the bend, strong gradients were measured. The mean and turbu-lence .uctuations of the streamwise velocity were presented for 30 deg, 60 deg, 75 deg, and 90 deg bend angle as well as at 6D downstream and 0.58D upstream the bend. At 30 deg, the maxi-mum streamwise velocity has shifted to the inner wall since the bend alters the .ow direction and a cross-stream pressure gradient is set up, whereas at 90 deg, the maximum streamwise velocity is displaced toward the outer wall. 
LDV measurements of the turbulent developing .ow through a U-bend for Re .5.7 and 11 104 with c .0:15 were later per-formed by Azzola et al. [86], where the longitudinal and azi-muthal velocity components were measured. The experimental results were additionally compared with the results from simula-tions (standard k e model). As the .ow passes through the bend, the r.m.s. of the longitudinal and azimuthal velocities was found to increase due to the additional mean strain associated with the turning of the primary .ow and the secondary-.ow velocity gra-dients created. The agreement between numerical and experimen-tal data was found to be somewhat acceptable by the authors. The largest disagreement between experimental and numerical data was found for the .ow .eld downstream of the bend, even though secondary velocities are decreasing in strength as the .ow recov-ers downstream the bend. The measurement of the r.m.s. of the velocity .uctuations in this study was later found to be erroneous by Lee et al. [91] who performed hot-wire measurements for the same .ow parameters as Azzola et al. [86]. Two other studies pre-senting turbulence statistics as well as investigating sublayer bursting in a U-bend for Re .5 104 and c .0:077 are the ones by Anwer et al. [88] and Anwer and So [92]. Miniature hot-wire and wall-static pressure measurements were performed at various stations upstream and downstream the bend providing among others the Reynolds stress tensor in the horizontal and normal planes at various streamwise locations (z=D .18;1;1;6;10;18;30;and 49, where the negative and positive signs denote the location upstream and downstream the straight pipe sections connected to the bend, respectively). The mean streamwise veloc-ity pro.le at 18D upstream the bend was undisturbed from the bend by agreeing with other available data on the fully developed turbulent .ow. However, 1D upstream the bend the mean stream-wise velocity pro.le along the x-axis starts to deviate from the fully developed state and with respect to the vertical plane it is no longer axisymmetric. 
The mean streamwise velocity pro.le is not recovered to its ini-tial fully developed state even at 18D downstream the bend. Along the bend, the .ow never reaches a fully developed state in contrast to the results obtained by Rowe [90], whereas all the Reynolds normal stresses increase compared to a straight pipe until the bend exit is reached. The study also supports the exis-tence of an additional cell (apart from the Dean vortex) existing in the half pipe cross section of the bend, which as the authors claim was also found in Ref. [90]. The .ndings were supported by means of k e modeling and comparison of their results with pressure measurements [90]. That ¡°secondary¡± cell starts to appear somewhere between 67 deg and 112 deg bend angle and then gradually dissolves until it disappears at a distance of 1D downstream the bend. The authors concluded that since this cell could be found from previous total pressure measurements [90], it should be pressure driven just like the Dean vortices. The exis-tence of additional cells in the bend was later investigated by other authors by means of turbulence modeling and will be discussed in Sec. 4.2.2. In a follow-up study, Anwer and So [92] investigated the sublayer bursting in a turbulent .ow in a curved pipe using the same set up as in Ref. [88] and the variable interval time averag-ing technique¡ªsee, for example, Ref. [93]¡ªin order to identify burst events. Among others, it was veri.ed that convex curvature tends to stabilize the .ow [1], whereas concave curvature and deceleration enhance the bursting frequency. 
The most extensive and well-cited studies on turbulent statistics of .ows in 90 deg and 180 deg bends are the ones by Sudo et al. [82,88]. Hot-wire measurements in a 90 deg bend at Re .6 104 and c .0:5 were performed in Ref. [87] and provided the three components of mean and .uctuating velocities as well as Reyn-olds stresses at various cross sections along and downstream the bend by rotating a probe with an inclined hot-wire. The authors con.rmed that up to 30 deg bend angle the high mean streamwise velocity was shifted toward the inner wall, and at 30 deg bend angle the Dean vortices were formed, see Fig. 15. At the exit of the 90 deg bend, the main .ow was nonuniform with the high velocity toward the outer wall and the low velocity toward the inner wall. The distribution of the streamwise velocity becomes smoother as the distance from the bend increased, whereas the Dean vortices start to decay due to dissipation. However, the secondary .ow was observed even at 10D distance from the bend exit (see Fig. 15). The turbulence intensity increases in the outer part of the cross section between 0 deg and 30 deg, in response to an increase of the longitudinal velocity gradients in the radial direction. However, high values of turbulence intensity were found at the inner pipe wall at 60 deg. At 90 deg bend angle, the maxima of the turbulence inten-sity (w0=Wb) was settled at the inner bend. 
The data from Ref. [87] have served as a benchmark for the val-idation of computational data [94,95]. Similar results were shown in another study by Sudo et al. [84] for a U-bend, where the .ow characteristics are almost the same with a 90 deg bend for angles up to 60 deg curvature. At 90 deg, the secondary .ow starts to 


Fig. 15 Mean .ow velocity contours for locations on the upstream straight section (negative z/d, where d is the pipe diameter), different bend angles /, and locations downstream the bend (positive z/d). Streamwise velocity contours (top), scaled by the bulk velocity and secondary .ow velocity vectors (bottom), where the length of D=8 corresponds to Wb. The left and right sides of each .gure show the inside and outside walls in the bend, respectively. Reprinted with permis-sion from Sudo et al. [87]. Copyright 1998 by Springer. Caption of .gure in the original publication: ¡°Time mean .ow velocities in cross section. (Top .gure: Longitudinal velocity contours, where numerical values are for W =Wa. Bottom .g-ure: secondary .ow velocity vectors, where the length of d=8 corresponds to Wa. The left and right sides of each .gure show the inside and outside walls in the bend, respectively).¡± (a) z0/d 521, (b) u 50 deg, (c) u 530 deg, (d) u 560 deg, (e) u 590 deg, (f) z/d 51, (g) z/d 52, (h) z/d 55, and(i) z/d 510. 
weaken with the highest streamwise velocity being located at the upper and lower pipe walls, whereas the low velocity is located at the pipe center. Measurements at downstream stations from the bend showed the higher streamwise velocity being shifted to the outer wall at 1D and it remained so until 10D distance from the bend. Lee et al. [91] extended the study by Azzola et al. [86]by performing hot-wire measurements using a slanted wire which could be rotated into six orientations. The measurements were performed at different angles and downstream stations (up to 16D) from a 180 deg bend at the same .ow parameters as in Ref. [86]. The authors compared mean velocity and r.m.s. pro.les of the longitudinal and azimuthal components with the ones by Azzola et al., and the agreement was found to be good. 
4.2.2 Turbulence Modeling¡ªStatistics. Since the early 1970s, Reynolds-averaged Navier¨CStokes (RANS) models have been 


Fig. 16 Comparison of friction factors in fully developed turbu-lent .ow. Experimental data: , Schlichting [3]; ., Ito [52], c 5 0:038; ,Ito [52], c 5 0:06, and ¡ª predictions using k2e model by Patankar et al. [101], where a denotes thepiperadiusand R the curvature radius. Reproduced with permission from Patankar et al. [101]. Copyright 1975 by Cambridge University Press. 
employed in order to predict the .ow in curved pipes (see, for example, Refs. [96] and [97]), even though it is expected that those will not be successful due to the anisotropic nature of turbu-lence, the secondary motion imposed by the curvature, and separa-tion. Reynolds stress models (RSMs) are expected to perform better when turbulence is anisotropic and curvature is present than eddy-viscosity models (EVM) [98], however, even those have been shown to fail also for small curvature ratios (see, for exam-ple, the recent efforts by Noorani [99] and R€
ohrig et al. [100]). 
One of the .rst efforts to predict the .ow through a bend by means of turbulence modeling was made in 1975 by Patankar et al. [101] using the k e model. They compared the results with experiments by Rowe [90] for a developing .ow in a 180 deg bend, and with the data of, among others, Mori and Nakayama 
[102] for a fully developed .ow in a helical pipe. Friction factors for fully developed .ow were also compared with the experimen-tal data by Ito [52]. The agreement was quite poor and especially for the calculated friction factors (see Fig. 16), the disagreement between the computations and the experiments was 8%. 
Al-Rafai et al. [103], performed experiments and numerical cal-culations for a turbulent .ow at Re .3:4 104 in two bends with c .0:07 and 0.14. Measurements were performed by means of LDV, whereas a k e model was employed for calculating the .ow. The main results consisted of mean and r.m.s. streamwise velocities which showed the anticipated result that the secondary .ow is stronger in the bend with the higher c. The agreement of the results from the modeling with the experimental data was again not good, however, the authors remarked that it was ¡°encouraging¡± in view of the simpli.ed assumptions and short-comings of the model. Hilgenstock and Ernst [104] tested two common turbulence models (k e and renormalization group known as RNG) and provided acceptable results for a .ow in an out-of-plane bend (see, e.g., Fig. 12(d)), showing that among the tested models, the RNG model performed slightly better, however, at a four times higher computational cost. 
The performance of various turbulence models was tested also later on by Pruvost et al. [94] for 90 deg and 180 deg curved pipes, based on the .ows examined experimentally by Anwer and So 
[17] and Sudo et al. [87]. The results from various models with three types of near-wall strategies (wall-function, a two-layer zonal model, and low-Re k e model with boundary layer resolu-tion) compared to experiments showed again that the RSM model predicts the .ow more accurately compared to EVM. Compari-sons with the data by Sudo et al. [87] were also performed by Hellstr€om and Fuchs [95] using the RNG k e model but the agreement was rather poor, especially at the inner wall of the bend where the computed streamwise velocity was underestimated. 
Sugiyama and Hitomi [105] analyzed the development of turbu-lent .ow in a 180 deg bend using an algebraic RSM. The results were compared with the experimental data, and the authors found 

(b) turbulent .ow with fully developed inlet, c 5 0:077 and Re 5 53104. Reprinted with permission from Anwer and So [17]. Copyright 1993 by Springer. Caption of .gure in the original publication: ¡°Secondary .ow pattern in a curved pipe: a laminar .ow with parabolic inlet, a 5 0:077, De 5 277.5, and Re 5 1, 000; b turbulent .ow with fully developed inlet, u 5 0, 077, De 5 13, 874 and Re 5 50, 000¡±. 
that the model is capable of predicting quantitatively the mean .ow, however, the r.m.s of the velocity .uctuations was underpre-dicted. Pellegrini et al. [106] tested different turbulence models at transitional Reynolds numbers and showed that the performance of the models varies signi.cantly depending on the wall treatment chosen. Di Piazza and Ciofalo [107] compared pressure drop and heat transfer data from DNS and (available) experiments with results from various turbulence models (k e, shear stress trans-port k x, and RSM k x) for a coiled tube. The RSM x model was the only one found to be in good agreement with the experimental results for the friction factor for a fully turbulent .ow. 
By using DNS results [81], modeling shortcomings were exam-ined, as, for example, modeling the eddy-viscosity instead of the complete Reynolds-stress tensor, which is a simplicity used often, especially in industry. The turbulent viscosity constant for both straight and curved pipes and for different Reynolds numbers was computed and plotted. The values were quite constant along the radius for the straight pipe but for the bend they varied at the pipe core. From the results, it was shown that for small curvature ratios (c .0:01), the constant was distributed more homogeneously, and therefore, it is expected that the model in that case can pro-vide reasonable results, however, for higher curvatures it would most likely fail, since no explicit representation of turbulence ani-sotropy is present in the model. 
4.2.3 Turbulence Modeling¡ªSecondary Flows. A matter that has been studied through turbulence modeling in the early 1990s was the existence of turbulence-driven secondary .ow in a curved tube of circular cross section. In a straight duct with noncircular cross section, it is known that streamwise vortices are formed due to local variation in Reynolds stresses and are known as Prandtl¡¯s secondary .ow of the second kind or ¡°turbulence-driven¡± second-ary .ow [108]¡ªwhereas the secondary .ow of the .rst kind is induced by skewing of the mean .ow, such as in curved channels. There have been some studies which support the existence of such Reynolds-stress induced secondary .ow for curved pipes of circu-lar cross section as well. Experimental and numerical studies suggested that in the cross-stream half plane, there are three cells appearing when the .ow is turbulent: a Dean cell and a second cell formed near the pipe center as a result of a local imbalance of centrifugal force and radial pressure gradient as well as a third, turbulence-driven cell appearing in conjunction with the Dean cell. When the .ow is laminar, a separation cell exists at the inner wall, which, when the .ow is turbulent has been suggested to dis-appear. Lai et al. [109] performed computations using a RSM and showed the existence of three vortex pairs within a U-bend at Re .5 104 and c .0:077. The primary vortex pair was the Dean vortices, which is driven by the centrifugal forces and is always present in a curved pipe. A second pair existed near the pipe core as a consequence of local imbalance between the cen-trifugal force and the pressure gradient, and .nally, a third pair of vortices was found near the outer bend embedded in the Dean vor-tices, see Fig. 17. This pair of vortices started to appear around 60 deg from the bend entrance, reached a maximum strength at the bend exit, and disappeared at about 7D downstream distance from the bend. This additional pair or vortices was not found for developing laminar curved-pipe .ows, and consequently, it was believed that this is a secondary .ow driven due to the anisotropy of the turbulent normal stresses and their gradients. Those results agreed qualitatively with the experiments in Refs. [86] and [88], however, later on, it was found [17] that the experiments were of limited resolution and were not able to capture such structures. The existence of a third cell is not validated, and there have been no studies¡ªto the best of our knowledge¡ªperformed on the mat-ter during the last two decades. 


Somehow surprisingly, it is still a matter of debate, how effec-tively RANS models can be used for the study of .ows in curved pipes, where secondary .ow and separation are or can be present. The most recent study where an extensive comparative assessment of how RANS and LES can handle .ows with streamline curva-ture and potential separation regions is the one by R€
ohrig et al. [100]. Two models, an eddy-viscosity and a Reynolds-stress model, were compared to LES and particle image velocimetry (PIV) data by Kalpakli and €u[110]. The agreement between
Orl€the models and the experiments was again poor, with the RSM models performing slightly better, as apparent also from Fig. 18. The agreement between the experiments and LES, on the other hand, was fairly good, both regarding statistics and capturing the instantaneous .ow .elds (an example is shown in Fig. 19). 
The .rst effort to employ LES considering an in.nitely long curved pipe using periodic boundary conditions was, however, done much earlier, in the late 1990s by Boersma and Nieuwstadt [111,112]. The results for the mean .ow as well as the r.m.s. of the velocity .uctuations were presented for c .0:01 and 0.05 and Reynolds number of approximately Re .38 103. The simula-tions showed that the r.m.s. is enhanced at the outer wall of the bend and suppressed at the inner, whereas in contrast to straight pipe .ow, the Reynolds stresses were found to be larger at the center of the pipe than compared to straight pipes. 
Most LES studies in curved pipes that have been performed since then have shown how LES can capture the secondary .ow in time (Ref. 
[113], see also Sec. 4.3). A method combining also LES with a characteristic-based split scheme was proposed by Tan et al. [114] to investigate the turbulent .ow in a 90 deg bend with two curvature ratios (c .0:25 and 0.5). Separation at the inner bend wall was only observed for the sharper bend (c .0:5). The method was validated against experiments by Sudo et al. [87], but only for c .0:25 it was found to be successful. Detached eddy simulation which is computationally less expensive than LES has also been used by Wang et al. [115]. The authors com-pared results in terms of the pressure coef.cient along the 90 deg pipe with experimental data by Tan et al. [114] at different Reyn-olds and curvature ratios providing only a qualitative comparison. 
4.2.4 DNS. In this section, studies which have employed DNS for the study of curved pipe .ows are presented separately from other computational models. Even though the .rst efforts to employ DNS in curved pipe .ows started in the late 1990s-beginning of the 2000s [116,117], not many DNS studies in such .ows have been performed since then, probably due to the high computational cost. In any case, most of the studies considered either a helical or toroidal pipe, where the .ow is fully developed and streamwise homogeneous (contrary to the .ow in spatially developing curved pipes), using the orthogonal helical coordinate system introduced by Germano [118,119] to express the Navier¨CStokes equations for helical pipes. Helical pipes differ from curved pipes in a sense that apart from curvature effects, a torsion effect also exists, induced by the pitch of the coil (see Fig. 1). However, in most practical examples, the coil pitch is small compared to the diameter of the coil, and essentially, the coil can be considered as a torus. It has also been shown that mild torsion does not have a signi.cant effect on global quantities [120]. The .ow phenomena observed in a torus are similar to those observed in spatially developing bends (e.g., with respect to the secondary motion, see as an example Ref. [121], where cross-sectional instantaneous .elds in a torus are compared to those obtained downstream a 90 deg bend), and it has the advantage that the .ow is continuous and periodic boundary conditions can be applied, which is bene.cial for DNS.10 
The .rst DNS of a fully developed turbulent .ow in a curved pipe for Re .5 103 and c .0:2 were performed by Boersma and Nieuwstadt [116], mainly show-ing the capability of performing DNS in such .ows by presenting mean cross-sectional .elds obtained from two different initial conditions. 
A few years later, H€
uttl and Friedrich [117,122] performed DNS to investigate turbulence statistics in straight, curved, and helically coiled pipes, having as initial condition a fully developed turbulent .ow starting from a straight pipe. In the earlier study by the authors, a range of curvature ratios (c .0;0:01;and 0:1) and torsions (s .0;0:11;and 0:165) was applied in order to study their effect on the turbulence characteristics. The turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) was found to exhibit much lower values from the case with high curvature ratio compared to straight pipe .ow, whereas secondary motion became much stronger for high torsion. The TKE also increased with increased torsion for the same cur-vature ratio. Mean and r.m.s. of the azimuthal and radial velocities as well as Reynolds shear stresses and TKE along horizontal and vertical cuts in a pipe cross section were presented for Reynolds number around Re .6 103. Mean and r.m.s. velocities were the main results shown in Ref. [122] for Re .5:6 103 and c .0:1. 
10On the other hand, experiments in a closed torus are practically dif.cult to be realized due to limited technical possibilities to maintain the .ow in the torus, but in some cases it is still feasible (see, for example, the introduction in Ref. [61]). 


Fig. 19 Snapshots of the in-plane velocity .eld showing coun-terclockwise Dean cell. (a) Vortex as obtained from PIV for Re 5 3:43104.(b) Vortex captured by the LES of Ref. [100]for the same .ow parameters as the PIV shown to the left. Small-scale .uctuations have been suppressed in both cases using a spatial low-pass .ltering operation. Reprinted with permission from R€
ohrig et al. [100]. Copyright 2015 by Elsevier. 
The main conclusion from that work was that the turbulence intensity in a curved pipe is lower compared to a straight pipe. 
DNS of the fully developed turbulent .ow in straight and curved pipes (c .0:01 and 0.1) at moderate Reynolds numbers (Re .5:3 103 and 1:2 104) were studied by Noorani et al. [81]. For the .rst time, complete Reynolds stress budgets were presented in that study. The local axial wall shear stress was found to be signi.cantly higher at the outer wall compared to the inner side. For the highest Re and c case studied, the wall shear showed a plateau at the inner wall indicating relaminarization (Fig. 20), whereas distinct oscillations were found near the outer wall. The Dean vortices were observed in the mean for c .0:01 having an appearance similar to that of laminar .ow at low Dean numbers but for the higher curvature ratio case, the core of the vortices moved toward the side walls and a distinct ¡°bulge¡± region appeared in the pipe center, see Fig. 21. This region was found to be connected to enhancement of the TKE in the core of the pipe bend. However, the authors did not investigate this further in terms of how near-wall turbulence could be affected by the pres-ence of this region of high turbulence production. 
More recently, Di Liberto et al. [123] investigated the turbulent .ow in curved pipes for three cases of (c, Re) .e0;1:7 104), (0.1, 1:5 104), and (0.3, 1:2 104Tby DNS. It was shown that the overall turbulence levels decreased for a curved pipe 

Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/appliedmechanicsreviews/article-pdf/68/5/050802/6075086/amr_068_05_050802.pdf by Shanghai Jiaotong University user on 03 October 2020

compared to the straight one, whereas increasing the curvature ratio leads to a further reduction of the turbulence levels. It was also suggested that increasing the curvature ratio stabilized the Dean vortices since no .uctuations were found for that case in the core region as for the lowest examined curvature ratio. Finally, the most recent DNS study is the one by Noorani and Schlatter [121], however, this will be discussed in Sec. 4.3, as this work did not focus on statistics but concerned mainly the evolution of the Dean vortices in time and the so-called swirl-switching phenomenon. 
4.3 Swirl Switching: Rocking or Rolling?. The turbulent .ow in curved pipes and especially the behavior of the Dean vorti-ces is the subject of several studies, most of them conducted dur-ing the last decade [100,124¨C128]. It is notable that the .rst major study on turbulent .ow in bends was carried out in the late 1960s [129], and it took three decades for a second study to be per-formed [130] on the matter. In the study by Tunstall and Harvey (hereafter [129] referred to as TH68), almost .ve decades ago, for the .rst time it was shown that the turbulent .ow through sharp bends differs from the vortex pattern existing for laminar curved pipe .ow, i.e., the counter-rotating Dean cells being symmetrical to the plane of symmetry in time. Visualizations of the .ow in an elbow showed the existence of a single swirling vortex which was rotating alternatingly in the clockwise and anticlockwise direc-tions with a frequency corresponding to a Strouhal number St .0.002, de.ned here as 
St .fD=Wb (4) 
where f denotes the frequency. A .ag placed between golden-plated contacts was additionally mounted where the switching of the vortex was detected from the visualizations. The output from a transducer placed upstream of the .ag showed that the .ow was dominated by two distinct states that interchanged abruptly, an anticlockwise and a clockwise-rotating vortex dominating the .ow .eld alternatingly. Spectra of the axial velocity component and wall-pressure close to the outer and at the inner pipe wall con-cluded that this ¡°switching¡± was occurring with a frequency corre-sponding to St .0:002, agreeing with the visualizations. Finally, to account for Reynolds number and curvature ratio effects, a series of measurements were performed for various curvatures and a Reynolds number range Re .4 22 104. The switching was found for all the cases with frequencies increasing with the Reynolds number and corresponding to Strouhal numbers between 
0.001 and 0.004. The study .nally concluded that in order for the switching of the vortices to be triggered, the .ow must be turbu-lent and the bend should be sharp enough to cause separation, sug-gesting that the origin of the phenomenon lies on the .ow 


ucker [130]. (b) Reconstructed instantaneous .ow .elds from the .rst six POD modes downstream a 90 deg bend for Re 5 3.4 3 104 and c 5 0:32. Magnitude of the in-plane components is shown as the background contour map and their direction as vectors. The highest magnitude of the in-plane components on average is 0.3Wb, while instantaneously it is 0.5Wb. Reprinted with permission from Kalpakli and €u[110]. Copyright 2013 by Elsevier. (c) Flow .eld from the most
Orl€energetic POD modes and the mean, from DNS in a torus with Re 5 1.2 3 104 and c 5 0:3. Isocontours of the streamfunc-tion W projected on top of its pseudocolors where red represents positive and blue indicates negative values of the streamfunction. Reprinted with permission from Noorani and Schlatter [121]. 
upstream of the bend but also the separation bubble at the inner bend corner. 
The phenomenon observed by TH68 was overlooked from the .uid dynamics¡¯ community for several decades until the study by Br€
ucker in 1998 [130] where¡ªamong others¡ªthe term ¡°swirl switching¡± was assigned to it for the .rst time. Two-dimensional two-component PIV (2D2C) measurements were performed in a sharp bend (c .0:5) for Re .2 103 and 5 103. For the low-est Reynolds number, the switching of the secondary .ow as described by TH68 was not observed. However, for the higher Reynolds number case, at which the .ow is expected to be turbu-lent, the Dean vortices were found to alternatingly push one another toward the lower or upper half of the pipes with respect to the plane of symmetry, see Fig. 22. Three distinct peaks were identi.ed from power spectral density of the time signal of the tangential velocity component at a point close to the inner wall of the bend. Those frequencies corresponded to St .0:03, 0.12, and 
0.2. This observation supports the fact that such oscillatory motion exists only for turbulent .ows as suggested in TH68, however, the .ow pattern that was observed by Br€
ucker was different from the single dominating cell pattern observed in TH68. A similar pattern to the one captured by Br€
ucker was later on visualized by means of time-resolved stereoscopic PIV (TS-PIV) by Kalpakli et al. 
[131] (where the same motion as the one found by Br€
ucker was described as ¡°rocking¡± of the cells) as well as in a follow-up work 
[110] and a recent DNS study in a torus [121] (see Fig. 22). 
Until the beginning of the 21st century, only the studies by TH68 and Br€
ucker on the swirl switching were available¡ªwith the one by Br€
ucker [130] being the only one providing quantita-tive visualizations of the phenomenon¡ªand it was believed that separation and turbulence were necessary conditions for it to appear. In more recent years, three main concerns have driven the studies on the swirl switching, as it will be described in the fol-lowing. First, from the two early studies by TH68 and Br€
ucker [130], it was made clear that the Dean vortices oscillate at a low frequency, however, how this frequency is affected by .ow parameters such as the Reynolds number or the curvature of the bend was unknown. Spectra of either the time series [110] or the proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) time coef.cients [124,126,132] were employed in order to investigate this. The latter method which stands for proper orthogonal decomposition was used by many authors [110,124¨C126,132] in order to .lter the .ow .eld and decompose the large-scale structures from small-scale turbulence. POD is known to rank the .ow structures or so-called modes by energy content: the mean .eld accounts for more than half of the energy, typically more than 90% in steady .ows [133]. POD-based low-order reconstruction of turbulent pipe .ows has recently become quite popular, especially when PIV data are at hand [134] because it allows for a better visualization of coherent structures present in turbulent .ow .elds. For the swirl switching studies that applied POD, the observed modal pat-tern in most of the studies had a speci.c trend: the .rst two most energetic modes (excluding the one representing the mean) depict either the Dean vortices tilted or a single vortex with its center located at the pipe centerline, spanning the whole pipe cross sec-tion. Those modes have been shown to switch order (in terms of energy) with downstream distance from the bend exit [125,132]. Finally, whether the origin of the switching is connected to the separation at the inner bend corner or upstream .ow conditions/ structures is a matter that has been investigated during the last decade [128]. 

The concern about the frequency of the switching as well as the role of separation in the switching mechanism was investigated by means of LES by R€
utten et al. in two similar papers [18,113] with the second one being the most well-cited. Those investigations showed¡ªin contrast to TH68¡ªthat the swirl switching is not caused by the separation at the inner bend corner because spectra of the forces onto the pipe walls showed distinct peaks for both a sharp (c .0:5) and a mild (c .0:17) bend, where in the latter one separation was not observed. Spectral analysis was also per-formed on the time series of the position of the ¡°stagnation point¡± (the minimum of wh wr 2, where wh and wr are the azimuthal
2 t
and radial velocity component, respectively) at the inner wall to check whether a correlation exists between the forces on the walls, the stagnation point movement, and the alternating domination of the Dean vortices. Both spectra from the forces and the stagnation point showed low-frequency oscillations at St .0:0055 [18] and St .0:01 [113] for Re .2:7 104. That frequency was found to agree with the switching frequencies found in TH68 by extrapolat-ing those measurements to the Reynolds number employed in the LES.11 
Higher frequency peaks at St .0:2 and 0.3 were also present in the LES spectra which were interpreted as shear layer instabilities. It was additionally found that the stagnation point¡ª and therefore the Dean vortices¡ªwas not abruptly switching between two stable positions (as suggested by TH68 and Br€
ucker [130]) but rather moving smoothly between azimuthal positions within 640 deg [113]. 
LES of a curved pipe .ow with the same .ow parameters as the experiments by Sudo et al. [87] were also conducted by Hellstr€
om and Fuchs [95]. The LES agreed well with the experiments, and the swirl switching pattern visualized by the LES agreed well with the observations by R€
utten et al. [113]. The .rst POD analysis of the swirl switching, which was done in this LES study, showed a periodic variation of the most energetic modes which corresponds to St .0.5. However, this was probably a subharmonic of the sampling frequency, rather than a physical frequency. 
An effort to identify the switching motion of the Dean vortices was made by Sakakibara et al. [132] by applying POD on TS-PIV data, acquired at z=D .2 ¨C15 downstream the bend exit for Re .
1:2 105 and c .0:75. The swirl switching was reconstructed using the most energetic modes, being the mode representing the mean and the .rst two modes related to the .uctuating part of the .ow. It was shown that the most energetic mode related to the .uctuating part at the z=D .2 resembles the switching motion as 
11However, one should note that this comparison was misleading since the Reynolds number used in TH68 (Re .2:2 105) misinterpreted by R€
was utten et al. [18] (as Re .2:2 104). Therefore, the extrapolation made by the authors was invalid since the difference in Reynolds number between the study by TH68 and Ref. [18] is too large. 
described in TH68, i.e., a single vortex switching direction alter-natingly from anticlockwise to clockwise rotation. However, this mode decayed as the .ow evolved from 2D further downstream and became weaker than the second mode at 2D. This second mode was found to be responsible for a rotation of the plane of symmetry of the Dean cells as described in Ref. [130]. Further-more, spectra of the second temporal mode at 2D showed a peak at St .0:07. This study showed¡ªamong others¡ªthe capability of POD to .lter and suppress small-scale turbulence in PIV data (where spatial resolution is limited) and consequently, emphasize the swirl switching (being a large-scale phenomenon). POD has since then been used in numerous studies investigating the swirl switching mechanism, one of the earlier ones being the study by Kalpakli and €u[110], where it was shown that the switching of 
Orl€the Dean vortices could be reconstructed by using only the .rst six POD modes. 
In a follow-up paper, Sakakibara and Machida [128] also inves-tigated the connection between structures existing upstream of the bend and the swirl switching mechanism for Re .2:7 104 and c .0:5. The azimuthal displacement of the stagnation point was found to be correlated to streaks existing upstream of the bend that was 7¨C8D long, see Fig 23. Those streaks were suggested to be related to the very large-scale motions (VLSMs, see, for exam-ple, Ref. [135]), though being much shorter in length compared to the VLSMs as known for turbulent pipe .ow studies in straight pipes. The authors concluded that the streaks are responsible for the oscillatory motion of the vortices, which adds another possible explanation (apart from separation as claimed in TH68) for the cause of the swirl switching. 
A similar effort as the one made in Ref. [132], i.e., to identify the origin of the swirl switching through POD analysis of data obtained at different downstream stations from the bend, was done by Hellstr€
om et al. [126]. The Reynolds number in this study was Re .2:5 104 and c .0:5. Flow .elds at three downstream distances from the bend exit (5, 12, and 18D) were acquired by means of TS-PIV. In that case, the reconstruction of the swirl switching was done considering only the most energetic modes related to the .uctuating part of the .ow, i.e., the mode represent-ing the mean was not included. This was based on the fact that (even in an earlier preliminary work [89]), the Dean vortices were seen only in the mean vorticity maps and not in the instantaneous ones. The authors concluded that the Dean vortices are weak and they were, therefore, not considered in the reconstruction process. Additionally, the Dean vortices in the mean vorticity map were not symmetrical and as the authors remarked: ¡°the mean vorticity [¡­] shows the tilted Dean motion as mentioned by Ref. [130]. The mean .ow structures are, however, not evident among the much higher levels of instantaneous vorticity¡± [126]. It should, however, be kept in mind, that in such turbulent .ows as the ones described here, the levels of instantaneous vorticity will always be higher than in the mean. Furthermore, small turbulent scales which cannot be resolved due to the limited spatial resolution of the PIV will appear as noise in the instantaneous vorticity maps. Therefore, in order to obtain a meaningful representation of the .ow .eld, appropriate .ltering of the data, in order to suppress the small scales, is important. Additionally, the comparison of the two studies at this point is misleading since a mean quantity (vorticity) in the case of Ref. [124] is not comparable to instantaneous quan-tities shown in Ref. [130]. The .rst POD mode at all the down-stream stations depicted (similarly to the .rst POD mode seen by Sakakibara et al. [132]at z=D .2, see above) a single vortex spanning the entire cross section and rotating in the clockwise and anticlockwise direction as the .ow evolved downstream the bend (Fig. 24). This mode was found to be associated with St .0:33 through spectra of its temporal counterpart. The second and third mode depicted two Dean cells tilted with respect to the plane of symmetry with one of the cells being considerably suppressed. The second mode was associated with St .0:16, nd was referred to as ¡°tilted Dean vortices.¡± This is similar to the mode appearing as the most energetic one in Ref. [110] but also in recent LES and DNS studies which will be discussed later in this section. The authors concluded that the tilting of the Dean cells is a transitional state between two states of the swirl switching, during which one of the cells is being suppressed resulting in a single vortex (shown as the .rst mode in the POD analysis). The time-scale of those transitions corresponds to structures of length 0.25¨C2.5D. Finally, it was proposed that the suppression of one of the Dean cells was related to the shear .ow region at the inner bend corner which is in return sensitive to upstream conditions, supporting the .ndings by Sakakibara and Machida [128]. 


A similar modal pattern as the one described by Sakakibara et al. [132] and Hellstr€
om et al. [126] was observed by Kalpakli et al. [125]. The evolution of the POD modes downstream (1, 2, and 3D) a mild (c .0:14) and sharp (c .0:39) bend was investi-gated in this study. At all the downstream stations where data were acquired, the .rst mode also depicted a single vortex span-ning the whole cross section, whereas the second and third modes depicted the tilted Dean vortices with one of them also being sup-pressed. In the same study, the .rst effort to control the swirl switching was made; a honeycomb was mounted at the inlet of the bend with the aim to suppress any unsteady upstream structures and at the same time reduce the turbulence intensity. In the case when the honeycomb was mounted, the modal pattern changed substantially compared to when the honeycomb was not present, possibly indicating a diminishing or delay of the switching. 
The study by Carlsson et al. [124] addresses both the connec-tion between VLSMs and switching as well as the shape of the POD modes for a variety of curvature ratios at the same Reynolds number and downstream location from the bend as in Ref. [110] by means of LES. The agreement between the LES and the 


Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/appliedmechanicsreviews/article-pdf/68/5/050802/6075086/amr_068_05_050802.pdf by Shanghai Jiaotong University user on 03 October 2020 
om et al. [126]. Copyright 2013 by Cambridge University Press. 

€
from Kalpakli and Orl€
u[110]. Copyright 2013 by Elsevier. (b) Same as before but the results are from DNS data in a torus for c 5 0:3 and Re 5 1:23104. Reprinted with permission from Noor-ani and Schlatter [121]. 
experimental data [110] was rather poor with regard to the mean velocity pro.les, however, the POD analysis of the LES data iden-ti.ed the same modes as found from the POD analysis of the experimental data. The authors observed St .0.13 from their fre-quency spectra analysis in the upstream straight pipe section and interpreted that as existence of large-scale structures (VLSMs). They suggested that the swirl switching is connected to those structures. 
Recent DNS by Noorani and Schlatter [121] in a torus (i.e., in.nitely long curved pipe) indicate that the swirl switching can-not be caused by neither separation nor large-scale structures existing upstream from the bend and con.icts with some of the above studies [124,128] but also with the initial study by TH68. That is simply because the swirl switching was observed in the toroidal pipe as well, exactly in the same manner as in previous experimental studies (clearly depicted in Fig. 22) showing even the same modal pattern as in Refs. [110] and [124]. In a torus, there are no upstream conditions as well as no local separation, therefore this excludes those two as the necessary conditions for the swirl switching to be present. Nevertheless, it is still unclear what exactly is the role of separation or upstream structures in the way the switching is formed. The spatial mode that was found from the POD analysis in the DNS study by Noorani and Schlatter [121], but also earlier in experiments [110] and LES [124], resem-bles antisymmetric Dean vortices seen also as the second POD mode in Ref. [126], see Fig. 25 
for an illustration. It was shown that this is the dominant mode that might cause the swirl switch-ing and it is only related to the curvature itself, whereas the single-swirl-mode observed earlier [125,126] did not exist in that study. This suggests that this mode is not part of the swirl switching mechanism but could instead be related to the down-stream straight sections from the bend, which are not present in the case of the torus. The study by Kalpakli et al. [125] showed, for example, that in a mild bend (where most probably separation did not occur), the oscillations were weaker compared to a sharp bend. In the same study, the insert of a honeycomb upstream of the bend which is expected to damp any large-scale structures indicated delay of the switching. Therefore, it could be that some .ow features enhance or delay the swirl switching but are not nec-essarily the cause of it. 
At this point, it should also be mentioned that a series of stud-ies, which have been published during the last decade [136¨C138], investigated the behavior of the secondary motion in bends com-prising the cooling system of a nuclear reactor (Japan sodium-cooled fast reactor, JSFR), however, without assigning the term swirl switching to their observations. The results from these stud-ies dealt mainly with the vortex shedding from the separation region, and the frequency spectra showed only peaks at frequen-cies corresponding to Strouhal numbers higher than St .0.4. However, a similar phenomenon resembling the swirl switching motion as captured in Ref. [131] has also been revealed, for exam-ple, through PIV measurements in Ref. [127]. The PIV measure-ments were performed in two elbow bends resembling the cold-and hot-leg pipings existing in the cooling system of the JSFR, and measurements were taken both along the bends and at down-stream cross sections. The two Dean vortices were found to alter-natingly dominate the .ow .eld rotating in the clockwise and anticlockwise directions in a periodic manner, whereas separation was captured at the inner bend corner. It was believed that this periodical .ow, that looked similar to what other authors have referred to as swirl switching, affected the behavior of the separa-tion region near the inner wall. The above references have been largely neglected in the literature even though the phenomena observed could be connected to the so-called swirl switching and those are the only ones dealing with very high Reynolds number (e.g., Re .4:2 107 in Ref. [127]). 
A list of the aforementioned studies dealing with the swirl switching including some of the parameters under which they were conducted are summarized in Table 2. From the above, it is made clear that the swirl-switching phenomenon interests many research groups and as has been underlined, this oscillatory motion can cause fatigue, increase noise, and lead to failures in industrial systems which consist of bends and conduits and where the .ow is highly turbulent, such as in the cooling systems of nuclear plants. And even though the interest on this phenomenon has increased during the last decade, many open questions still remain. First of all, the pattern of the switching itself is unclear, i.e., are the Dean vortices ¡°rocking¡± in between two distinct states or does each one of them as a single vortex smoothly ¡°roll¡± 

Table 2 Summary of the studies related to the swirl switching. Note that the lowest Strouhal numbers are usually associated with the swirl switching. 
Author, year  4Re 10  c  z/D  St Diagnostic technique  
Tunstall 
and 
Harvey, 
1968 
[129] 
Br€ucker, 
1998 
[130] 
R€utten 
et 
al., 
2001 
[18] 
R€utten 
et 
al., 
2005 
[113] 
Hellstr€om 
and 
Fuchs, 
2007 
[95] 
Sakakibara 
et 
al., 
2010 
[132] 
Sakakibara 
and 
Machida, 
2012 
[128] 
Hellstr€om 
et 
al., 
2012 
[89] 
Kalpakli 
and 
€Orl€u, 
2013 
[110] 
Kalpakli 
et 
al., 
2013 
[180] 
Hellstr€om 
et 
al., 
2013 
[126] 
Fj€allman 
et 
al., 
2013 
[139] 
Kalpakli 
et 
al., 
2015 
[125] 
Noorani 
and 
Schlatter, 
2015 
[121] 
Carlsson 
et 
al., 
2015 
[124] 
 4¨C22 0.5 2.7 2.7 6 12 2.7 1.2, 1.8 1.4, 2.4, 3.4 2.4 2.5 2.4 2.4 1.17 3.4  1 0.5 0.5, 0.17 0.5, 0.17 0.25 0.75 0.5 1 0.31 0.4 0.5 0.31 0.14, 0.39 0.1, 0.3 0.32, 0.5, 0.7, 1  2.2 0, 1.5 2.5 2.5 0, 0.5 2, 10, 15, 25 2.5 5.3 0.67 0.2, 2 5, 12, 18 0.67 1, 2, 3 Torus 0.67  0.001¨C0.004 Visualization, gold-shim .ag 0.03, 0.12 2D2C PIV 0.0055, 0.014, 0.2, 0.3 LES 0.01, 0.2, 0.3 LES ¡ª LES 0.07 2D3C PIV ¡ª 2D3C PIV ¡ª 2D3C PIV 0.04, 0.12, 0.18 2D3C PIV ¡ª 2D3C PIV 0.16, 0.33 2D3C PIV ¡ª LES ¡ª 2D3C PIV 1, 0.087 DNS 0.003¨C0.01, 0.13, 0.5¨C0.6 LES  
Applied Mechanics Reviews  SEPTEMBER 2016, Vol. 68 / 050802-17  

Table 3 Studies of turbulent .ows in straight and curved pipes with and without swirl 
Flow in bends Swirling flow in straight pipes Swirling flow in bends 
Tunstall and Harvey, 1968 [129] White, 1964 [145] Binnie, 1962 [144] Enayet et al., 1982 [85] Murakami and Kikuyama, 1980 [146] Shimizu and Sugino, 1980 [161] Azzola et al., 1986 [86] Kikuyama et al., 1983 [150] So and Anwer, 1993 [157] Anwer et al., 1989 [88] Kikuyama et al., 1983 [148] So and Anwer, 1993 [158] So and Anwer, 1993 [158] Reich and Beer, 1989 [147] Anwer and So, 1993 [17] Boersma 
and 
Nieuwstadt, 
1996 
[112] Eggels, 1994 [152] Chang and Lee, 2003 [163] Br€ucker, 1998 [130] Imao et al., 1986 [149] Pruvost et al., 2004 [94] Sudo et al., 1998 [87] Orlandi and Fatica, 1997 [153] Orl€
Kalpakli and €u, 2013 [110] H€uttl and Friedrich, 2001 [122] Speziale et al., 2000 [155] Kalpakli Vester et al., 2016 [141] Pruvost et al., 
2004 
[94] Rocklage-Marliani et al., 2003 [151] R€Feiz et al., 2003 [154]
utten et al., 2005 [113] Kalpakli et al., 2012 [131] Facciolo et al., 2007 [144] Sakakibara and Machida, 2012 [128] Nygard and Andersson, 2009 [156] Fj€allman, 2013 [139] ¡­ Kalpakli and €u, 2013 [110]
Orl€Noorani et al., 2013 [81] Hellstr€
om et al., 2013 [126] Carlsson et al., 
2015 
[124] R€
ohrig et al., 2015 [100] ¡­ 
alternatingly in time. Furthermore, the origin of the switching of the Dean vortices is still unclear: is it connected to VLSMs, is sep-aration a possible trigger or could it just be a result of an instabil-ity mechanism in the bend itself. Finally, the possibility of control of the switching is an unexplored .eld which could provide possi-ble practical ways to avoid fatigue of piping systems. 
5 Swirling Flow 
When a swirling motion is superimposed on the main .ow, the balance between centrifugal, inertial, and viscous forces in the curved pipe changes. Turbulent swirling .ow is encountered in many technical applications such as in hydraulic plants, combus-tion chambers, and any machine that involves a turbine or fan or a combination of bends, e.g., double bends [140]. As apparent from a recent study [141], the work that has been done on swirling tur-bulent .ow in bends is not very extensive, compared to, for instance, work that has been done in swirling turbulent .ow in straight pipes (see as a reference Table 3 
extended from Ref. [141], where studies in straight and curved pipes with and without swirl are listed). 
For the generation of swirl, a number of different methods exist (pipe rotation, tangential injection, and vanes), which have a dif-ferent effect on the base .ow. For details, the reader is referred to Ref. [142]. This section will mostly refer to studies using the rota-tion method, i.e., through axially rotating a straight pipe section upstream the bend, since it provides a well-de.ned velocity pro.le and does not leave traces of the swirl generating mechanism (such as other means to introduce swirl on the .ow). 
In cases where the swirling motion is introduced by imposing a secondary .ow or by means of passive methods (guiding vanes), one needs to calculate an integral swirl number, de.ned as the ratio between the .uxes of angular momentum to streamwise momentum [142]. Such a swirl number has been de.ned by Gupta et al. [143] as follows: 
eR e2p WUhr 2 dr dh 
00
Sint .eR e2p (5) 
RW2rdrdh 00 
where Uh is the circumferential velocity, and r and h the radial and angular coordinates, respectively. 
When the .ow is in solid-body rotation, the imposed swirl intensity can be approximated in terms of the mean angular velocity (X) of the rotating motion related to the mean bulk veloc-ity as follows [94]: 
XR 
SSB .(6)
2Wb 
However, when the whole pipe is rotated to create the swirl motion and the .ow is turbulent, the .ow is not in solid-body rota-tion [144], see also below in the following paragraphs. In that case, the imposed swirling motion can be expressed through the swirl number de.ned here as 
Uw
S .(7)Wb 
with Uw being the pipe wall velocity. This is a quite common expression used in recent studies, and its de.nition is also adapted here. The above swirl numbers are connected to each other; when the mean axial velocity is constant for a plug .ow and Uh has a linear variation, the integral swirl number becomes equal to the swirl number for a .uid in solid-body rotation, whereas from Eqs. 
(6) 
and (7), we get S .2SSB. 
For turbulent .ow in straight pipes with imposed swirl, a num-ber of studies have been performed and it is now well-known that swirl decreases the pressure drop [145]. The mean streamwise velocity pro.le becomes less full and approaches the one of a lam-inar .ow [146,147]. It has been shown that in the case of turbulent swirling .ow, due to the cross-stream Reynolds stresses, the .uid is not in solid-body rotation but the azimuthal velocity pro.le is nearly parabolic [144,148,149]. Furthermore, an increase in the swirl intensity has been shown to decrease the turbulence intensity [149,150]. More recent three-dimensional LDV measurements of turbulent swirling straight pipe .ow by Rocklage-Marliani [151] showed an annihilating effect of the swirl on the Reynolds shear stresses, i.e., the Reynolds stresses were found to be low in the pipe core region, therefore suggesting that the swirl tends to lami-narize the .ow. One of the .rst LES performed on turbulent swirl-ing .ow [152] con.rmed the above and showed that the largest decrease in the turbulence intensity is observed for the streamwise velocity component. Early DNS [153] showed that the reduction in drag is responsible for a widening of the near wall structures in a turbulent swirling straight pipe .ow. Those data were used later in Ref. [154] in order to show that LES can reasonably well pre-dict phenomena in rotating turbulent pipe .ows. RSMs were developed by Speziale et al. [155] and were successful in captur-ing the main features of turbulent swirling .ow as described 


Fig. 26 Flow structures at increasing swirl numbers, S, as cap-tured by Stereo-PIV experiments. Background contour maps show the streamwise velocity component scaled by the bulk velocity, whereas the in-plane velocities are shown as the imposed vectors. Reproduced with permission from Kalpakli and €u[110]. Copyright 2013 by Elsevier. 
Orl€
above. More recent DNS on turbulent swirling .ow in a straight pipe [156] have shown the effect of swirl on near wall structures which appear as elongated streaks being tilted and shortened as the swirl intensity increases. 
The case of a turbulent swirling .ow through a 180 deg curved pipe at Re .5 104 with c .0:077 was examined experimen-tally in Ref. [157] and later in Ref. [17]. The effects of swirl with SSB .0.5 on the secondary .ow were examined through a compar-ison with nonswirling .ow data acquired in the same setup. Wall-static pressure distributions between the swirling and nonswirling cases showed opposite results in the two cases: the static pressure was lower at the outer bend as compared to the pressure at the inner for the swirling .ow whereas the opposite was found for the nonswirling case. The wall shear stress did not show differences between the outer and inner wall whereas for SSB .0, there was a signi.cant difference between the shear at the inner and outer walls due to the existence of the Dean cells in that case. From the mean velocity pro.les along the xz-plane, it was shown that the velocity distribution is more uniform and symmetric for the swirl-ing .ow case. The aforementioned observations suggested that a single dominating cell exists and that the curved-pipe .ow becomes fully dominated by the imposed solid-body rotation. An increase in turbulence production by the imposed swirling motion resulted in more uniform distributions of the Reynolds normal stresses in the radial and tangential directions. As a consequence, the radial and azimuthal gradients of these stresses are reduced, which explains why the secondary .ow created by the bend can-not be sustained. 
The follow-up work by So and Anwer [158] showed that in swirling .ow, the distance needed for the .ow to become fully developed in a curved pipe is shorter than that needed in the case of a straight pipe. Furthermore, it was found that the bend acceler-ates the decay of the swirl compared to swirling .ow in a straight pipe. 
Pruvost et al. [94] numerically studied the same .ow case as in Ref. [17] but extended the investigation for a range of swirl num-bers between SSB .0 and 0.5. An additional case for SSB .2.5 was also studied but no experimental data were available for vali-dation. Different numerical approaches were tested, and the results were compared to the experimental data by Anwer and So 
[17] both for the swirling and nonswirling cases. However, all the models gave poor agreement with the experiments for the mean velocity pro.le and TKE pro.le for SSB .0. For SSB .0.5 the low-Re, k e model gave satisfactory results for the mean veloc-ity, but again the agreement with the experimental data for the TKE pro.le was poor. Nevertheless, it was shown that there exists a complex interaction between the Dean vortices and the swirling motion for small S. As the swirling motion intensi.es, the Dean cells tend to merge into a single cell until the .ow .eld becomes completely swirl dominated. Similar observations about the inter-action between the Dean vortices and the swirling motion in tur-bulent .ow were made by means of PIV experiments by Kalpakli and €u[110] for S .0
Orl€1:2. The difference between that study and the one by Anwer and So [17] is that the swirling motion was created by rotating the whole straight pipe mounted upstream of the bend, whereas in the case of Ref. [17] only a pipe section rotated, therefore, the swirl was decaying downstream the rotated pipe section. Kalpakli and €u[110] showed that even for a low
Orl€swirl intensity, the swirling motion has a stabilizing effect on the .ow, moving the high speed .uid from the outer wall to the center of the pipe. As the authors claim ¡°axisymmetry of the .ow .eld is gradually achieved with increasing swirl number, as the Dean vor-tices merge resulting in a single large-scale motion located almost at the center of the pipe for S .1.2.¡± POD analysis was addition-ally performed in order to decompose the superimposed swirling motion from the turbulent .ow .eld. For S .1.2, the .rst POD mode depicted similar structures to the Dean vortices. Those observations¡ªfrom the .rst quantitative visualization experi-ments in swirling turbulent curved pipe .ow¡ªagreed qualita-tively with the aforementioned simulations in Ref. [94] and are illustrated in Fig. 26. Another aspect investigated by some authors for turbulent swirling .ow in curved pipes is the existence and shape of the so-called VLSMs, which are known to exist for tur-bulent straight pipe .ow [159]. For a curved pipe with c .0:36, 
€
Kalpakli and Orl€showed that .sh-bone-like
u[110] structures exist, similar to those found by Nygard and Andersson [156] for swirling turbulent .ow in a straight pipe, however, those were inclined due to the presence of the bend. Whether those structures were truly VLSMs was not investigated by the authors. The effect of increasing the swirl intensity was further shown to tear up the observed elongated structures, agreeing again with the .ndings by Nygard and Andersson [156] for a straight pipe. 
A database for both statistical and modal analysis for turbulent swirling .ow in a curved pipe was recently made available by Kalpakli Vester et al. [141]. Data from hot-wire and TS-PIV measurements taken at the same experimental conditions as in Ref. [110] were presented and analyzed for a range of Reynolds and swirl numbers. This is also a case more suitable for CFD vali-dations compared to previous data available in the literature [17,157] since the in.ow condition is well-de.ned by rotating the whole straight pipe section connected to the bend, and the swirl intensity remains the same along the pipe. The authors showed the in.uence of increasing swirl intensity on the .ow statistics such as the mean and r.m.s. velocity pro.les which are shown in Fig. 

27. The effects from the bend are clearly smeared out as the swirl strength increases, with the velocity pro.le becoming more uni-form and the higher velocities shifted from the outer pipe wall to the pipe core. 
Other well-known studies which did not use the rotation method to generate swirl should also be brie.y mentioned. One of the earlier studies on swirling .ow is the one in Ref. [160], where swirling .ow through a bend was visualized. Using a Pitot tube, pressure losses in a 180 deg bend were investigated in Ref. [161]. The difference in the formed .ow patterns in the case when the imposed swirling motion is a free-or forced-type vortex was also investigated. Those data were later used to validate a theoretical study of swirling curved pipe .ow [162]. The effects of swirl on the secondary .ow .eld along a bend were also studied in a later work by Chang and Lee [163] through planar PIV measurements for four different Re in the range 1:02:5 104. In that study, the swirling motion was created by tangential inlets. The main observation was that a two-cell pattern existed at the entrance of the bend which disappeared as the .ow developed along the bend with a decrease in swirl intensity. 
6 Pulsating Flow 
Pulsating (or pulsatile) .ow, i.e., the unsteady .ow12 
composed of a periodic and a steady component is typical in biological .ows, such as the respiratory and cardiovascular system (see, for example, the textbook by Pedley [5]). Therefore, the main body of unsteady .ow research has been devoted to physiological .ows [164¨C166]. However, pulsatile .ow occurs in and plays a major role in the performance of technical systems as well, such as reciprocating engines or heat exchangers. Stokes [167] was the .rst to do substantial work on unsteady .ows and today the boundary layer thickness in pulsating .ows bears his name. In a pipe, it is known that due to the nonslip condition at the wall, additional vorticity varying in time needs to be generated in the boundary layer in order to account for the mass-.ow variation under pulsating .ow conditions. In that sense, shear waves are generated, which propagate from the wall into the .uid and are attenuated as they do so [168]. In laminar .ow, the wave attenua-tion is characterized by a length scale, known as the Stokes
p...........
boundary layer and de.ned as ¡®s .2 =x, where x .2pf is the angular frequency of the pulsations and is the kinematic vis-cosity. Stokes showed that the amplitude of the waves are attenu-ated by a factor e .2.71 over a distance equal to ¡®s which means that the higher the pulsation frequency, the thinner the boundary layer. Womersley [169] de.ned a nondimensional parameter, which today bears his name and shows the counteraction between the transient inertial forces and the viscous forces 
r....
x 
a .R (8) 
but can also be seen as a ratio between an outer length scale (R) and the Stokes boundary layer thickness. 
According to the above, the boundary layer is expected to be thick for low Womersley numbers, whereas for large Womersley numbers it is expected to be thin. For example, it has been shown that for highly pulsatile turbulent .ow, the shear waves propagat-ing into the .uid from the wall are strongly attenuated and con-.ned mainly to the viscous sublayer region. The inner and outer layers are hence completely decoupled, and turbulence in the outer region is not affected by the pulsations and can be regarded as frozen, see the reviews in Refs. [168] and [170]. 
For physiological .ows, the Womersley number is small (of order 1) as is the Reynolds numbers whereas in technical applica-tions (such as the internal combustion engine), those numbers 
12It should be noted that unsteady .ows may be divided into two categories: pulsating .ow when the periodically time-averaged velocity is non-zero and oscillating .ow in which the periodically time-averaged velocity is zero. 

r.m.s. streamwise velocity pro.les normalized by the bulk velocity at Re 5 2:43104 and at 0.67D distance from the bend. Reprinted with permission from Kalpakli Vester et al. [141]. Copyright 2016 by Springer. Caption of .gure in the original publication: ¡°The swirl number effect on the a outer-scaled streamwise r.m.s. and b turbulence intensity at ReD 5 24;000¡±. 
may be of the order of 102 and 105, respectively. According to Ref. [171], for Womersley numbers smaller than approximately one, the .ow can be considered quasi-steady since the turbulent structures have time to accommodate to the slowly varying .ow rate. For 1 <a <30, the .ow is in an intermediate state (passage between quasi-steady and pulsatile .ow), whereas for a >30 the frequency of the pulsatile motion is high enough for turbulence not to be able to respond to the rapid changes in the .ow and the .ow becomes inertia dominated. Hence, turbulence becomes inde-pendent of the phase angle of the pulsations. In the following, we will focus on previous studies on pulsating turbulent .ow in curved pipes, which as we will see are limited. 
Pulsations are sometimes induced in heat exchangers since investigations have shown that they might increase the heat trans-fer rates [172]. In that respect, pulsatile turbulent .ow has been studied for different pipe con.gurations (mainly coiled tubes) in terms of enhancement of the heat transfer [173,174]. However, until recently, there were no studies¡ªto the best of our knowledge¡ªdealing with the effects of pulsatile .ow on turbulent curved pipe .ow with regard to the secondary .ow evolution or the dynamics of the .ow. Studies in laminar, low-frequency pulsa-tile .ow have already shown that under one cycle, the secondary .ow patterns vary due to competition between the centrifugal, inertial, and viscous forces [166,175,176]. Moreover, studies on the effect of high pulsations (for Womersley numbers a30) on 


Fig. 28 Top: Contour plots of the velocity .elds obtained through reconstruction using the four most energetic POD modes. z=D 5 0:2;Re 5 2:43104;c 5 0:4, and a 5 41. Five pulsating .ow .elds are shown for the corresponding phase angles indicated (1¨C5) in the centerline sig-nal of the streamwise velocity (middle subplot). Streamwise velocity scaled by the bulk speed is shown as the background contour map, whereas the in-plane components are shown as the vectors. Bottom: the .rst, second, and third POD modes (from left to right) shown as ¡°cross-sectional¡± streamlines. Reprinted with permission from Kalpakli et al. [180]. Copyright 2013 by Elsevier. 
turbulent curved pipe .ows encountered for example in the inter-nal combustion engine .ow environment are scarce. 
Kalpakli et al. [177] performed stereo PIV (SPIV) and instanta-neous mass .ow and pressure measurements in a unique .ow rig (CICERO rig, see Ref. [178]) that can be run both under steady and highly pulsatile .ow conditions (up to f .100 Hz) for engine-.ow-related studies. The secondary .ow downstream a sharp bend (c .0:4) was captured for a .30 revealing a complex .ow .eld during one pulse period and velocity magnitudes up to four times the bulk velocity. Instantaneous mass .ow and pressure measurements were also performed upstream and downstream a commercial passenger car turbocharger turbine with the bend used for the SPIV measurements mounted at its inlet and for various bulk velocities and 40 Hz pulsatile frequency. Comparisons with a similar study that used a straight pipe as the inlet to the same tur-bine [179] showed that the hysteresis loop in the turbine maps was signi.cantly damped in the case with the bend mounted at the inlet of the turbine. In a follow up study, Kalpakli et al. [180] investigated in more detail the effect of high pulsations (Womers-ley numbers a .41 and 71), on the secondary .ow. TS-PIV meas-urements were performed in a curved pipe of c .0:4, and the .ow .eld at cross sections 0.2D and 2D downstream locations was quantitatively visualized. The .ow structures were captured during one pulsation cycle, and it was shown that four main pat-terns existed: during acceleration and deceleration the .ow pattern resembled the one seen in steady .ow in the mean, i.e., two sym-metrical vortices could be observed. At the peak of acceleration weak secondary motion existed, whereas at the end of the deceler-ation phase the vortices overtake the whole cross section but with their centers located at the centerline of the pipe (see Fig. 28). POD was also for the .rst time applied on a highly pulsating turbulent .ow through a curved pipe, and it was shown that POD reconstruction of the .ow .elds is ¡°superior to phase-averaging, although the latter serves as the main processing tool for pulsatile .ow .elds so far in the literature.¡± The vortices seen in the phase-averaged and POD reconstructed .ow .elds were also observed as the most energetic spatial POD modes. 
A third work by the same group was also published recently 
[181] with its main focus, this time, on the statistical analysis and decomposition of highly pulsating turbulent .ow signals measured by means of a single hot-wire. Among others, the usability and shortcomings of a single hot-wire probe without temperature com-pensation in a highly pulsating .ow were demonstrated and explained. The Reynolds number was Re .2:4 105, and the Womersley number was a .80, which is the highest Womersley number reported¡ªto the best of our knowledge¡ªfor measure-ments in a curved pipe. Time series, phase-averaged, and low-pass .ltered signals, mean and r.m.s. pro.les, probability density function distributions, ensemble-averaged velocity pro.les at vari-ous phase angles, as well as reconstructed signals through singular value decomposition (SVD) were presented and discussed. The SVD was shown to be a more robust and ¡°user-independent¡± tech-nique than digital .ltering and phase-averaging, whereas the decomposition techniques employed were ¡°capable of separating the ¡°background¡± (small-scale) turbulence from the large-scale pulsatile motion. [¡­] indicates that the large-scale pulsatile motion, due to the wide scale separation, is merely superposed on the turbulence¡± [181]. 
7 Summary and Outlook 
Curved pipes are met in a variety of technical applications and give rise to strong secondary .ows, enhanced pressure drop, as well as sometimes low-frequency oscillations. Issues that have been puzzling the .uid dynamics¡¯ community for many decades regarding .ows in curved conduits are of both applied and basic scienti.c interest, namely, transition to turbulence and pressure drop for different bends of practical importance as well as how the secondary motion behaves when the .ow is turbulent, pulsat-ing, and/or swirling. The .ow environment in a curved pipe is challenging to investigate both for experimentalists and numeri-cists due to the .ow¡¯s three-dimensionality (therefore, all the velocity components need to be obtained to get a complete picture of the .ow .eld), occurrence of separation in the inner bend wall, as well as large velocity gradients. Modeling of such .ows is gen-erally favored with RANS models still being largely used in industry, however, it has been shown that due to the complexity of the .ow, simple turbulence models cannot predict such .ow .elds accurately. Instead, highly resolved LES or DNS need to be performed, which need to be validated against experiments and are computationally expensive and restricted to moderate/low Reynolds numbers, respectively. 

One of the matters that to a large extent is still an unexplored area is the transition from laminar to turbulent .ow in curved pipes. It is noticeable that the .rst instability analysis on curved pipe .ow was performed in 2016 [19], even though studies on the transition to turbulence in curved pipes are traced back to the beginning of the 1930s. It was shown already in the works by Tay-lor [15] and White [16] that the .ow in a curved pipe can remain laminar for substantial higher values of the Reynolds number compared to a straight pipe. The stabilization effect of curvature on the .ow was nicely visualized by Sreenivasan and Strykowski [55], who were the .rst ones to try to explain why the .ow in the coil is more stable compared to the downstream straight pipe sec-tion. The questions put forward in 1983 by the authors (¡°[¡­] what is the maximum Reynolds number for which laminarization is possible? [¡­] how precisely does the laminarized .ow return to a turbulent state when downstream of the coil the .ow is allowed to develop in another long straight pipe section?¡±) describe the puzzlement that prevailed in the community at that time about the transition from laminar to turbulent .ow in the presence of curva-ture. Speculations about the role of the secondary .ow or existing traveling waves [59,61] on the onset of instability were put for-ward through the years in the absence of a detailed instability analysis study. Pressure drop measurements, which were com-monly performed in order to relate the onset of turbulence to a deviation of the f¨CRe curve from the linear behavior of laminar .ow [52,65,76] gave little insight into the mechanisms of the tran-sition process as well. 
Instability analysis of the .ow in a torus (coil with zero pitch) became available only recently with the DNS study by Canton et al. [19] con.rming previous suggestions [62,65] that the transi-tion process in a curved pipe has several stages and is not as abrupt as in the straight pipe. It is con.rmed that for curvature ratios below 0.02¨C0.04, subcritical transition occurs and that the .rst instability in a torus is a Hopf bifurcation. Canton et al. could .nally give an explanation for the nonmonotonic behavior of the lower-critical Reynolds number that puzzled Sreenivasan and Strykowski 
[55] in the early 1980s, as a switch from subcritical to supercritical transition. It would be interesting, however, to extend such studies for the case of a coil and a wide range of coil pitches as well as investigate the effect of torsion on transition. 
Experiments designed to explore the velocity distribution and turbulence statistics in curved pipe .ows are maybe fewer than one would expect and were mainly performed with pressure probes, hot-wires, and LDV in mainly 90 deg and 180 deg bends. The results in these studies are seldom directly comparable since they are done at different parameter values (Re and c) but there are some common conclusions that can be drawn. All the studies show that the .ow is affected up to one diameter upstream the bend and also that the relaxation distance to fully developed pipe .ow downstream the bend is much longer. Furthermore, at the inlet of the bend the .ow accelerates on the inner (convex) side of the bend and decelerates on the outer side up to about 30 deg from the entrance, where after there is a shift of the high velocity region to the outer (concave) side of the bend. All the studies also show the existence of a pair of Dean cells. Various authors have tried to predict turbulent .ow in curved pipes by using RANS models (either eddy-viscosity or RSMs), however, those failed to capture the .ow correctly. 
The behavior of the Dean vortices under turbulent .ow condi-tions has met a revived interest during the last two decades, since the studies were initiated in 1968 by Tunstall and Harvey [129]. What is known today as the swirl-switching phenomenon or mechanism describes the temporal movement of the Dean vortices for turbulent .ow in a curved pipe; each of the Dean vortices takes over the .ow .eld changing direction of rotation from clockwise to anticlockwise alternatively. As remarked in 2005 by R€
utten et al. [113]: ¡°[¡­] this phenomenon could cause fatigue in piping systems due to low-frequency oscillations, [but] not much atten-tion seems to have been focused on it in the literature. It is for example, completely ignored in the review articles on curved pipes.¡± During the last 15 years, the swirl switching has attracted investigations both from numericists and experimentalists within the .uid dynamics¡¯ community. The most popular tools used so far are either LES (but also recently the .rst DNS to study this phenomenon were performed [121,182]) and PIV, which can pro-vide the three velocity components as well as a quantitative pic-ture of the secondary motion. At the same time, proper orthogonal decomposition started to become a popular tool in the hands of .uid dynamicists dealing with the swirl switching [110,124,126,132]. The main contributions in the literature the past two decades to unravel the mystery of this phenomenon are the following in chronological order: R€
utten et al. [113] found by means of LES that the oscillatory motion of the Dean cells is not caused by separation at the inner bend corner as initially believed by Tunstall and Harvey [129]. They also remarked that the switch-ing motion is not abrupt from one state to another (i.e., a dominant cell rotates clockwise and at another moment rotates in the oppo-site direction) but it is a smooth transition between different states. Kalpakli et al. [110] reconstructed (by means of POD analysis) the three states between which the two Dean vortices are switch-ing; symmetric, as well as dominant clockwise and counterclock-wise Dean cell. Sakakibara and Machida [128] made, through conditional averaging, the important observation that elongated structures existing upstream from the bend are correlated to the movement of the Dean cells downstream the bend. Those .ndings were later supported also by Hellstr€
om et al. [126] by means of POD analysis, and they additionally suggested that the .ow .eld in a curved pipe is governed by two states, the swirl switching (a sin-gle cell spanning the whole cross-section and appearing as mode 1) and the Dean motion (tilted Dean vortices with one of them being suppressed, those were seen as modes 2 and 3). The same modes were seen later also in the POD analysis by Kalpakli et al. [125], however, the physical meaning of them is still unclear. 
All the studies (from the initial one by Tunstall and Harvey to the more recent ones) agree on one thing that the swirl switching is happening at low frequencies that correspond to Strouhal num-bers of the order 10 2, however, peaks at higher St are also pres-ent in the spectra but are usually associated to other phenomena such as vortex shedding [110,113,121,130]. Despite the agreement on the frequency range, it is still unclear how this phenomenon is triggered; the most recent study and the .rst DNS data on the switching [121] showed that the cause of the oscillatory motion of the Dean cells can be neither separation nor upstream structures. The DNS were performed for a torus with periodic boundary con-ditions; therefore, there was no upstream straight section con-nected to the curved part where separation could occur, therefore the assumptions by previous investigators become obsolete. Fur-thermore, the POD modes from the DNS data did not depict the single swirl mode found in Ref. [126], but rather the POD modes from this study were very similar to the ones shown in Refs. [110] and [124]. Once more, it is still a blur what those modes can tell us or how important separation or upstream large-scale structures are for the triggering of the swirl switching, however, as indicated in Kalpakli et al. [125], those factors could still enhance or delay the oscillatory motion of the vortices. It appears from the above that in order to fully explore the mechanism and determine a phys-ical understanding of the swirl switching one should probably obtain the full three-dimensional .ow .eld upstream, along, and downstream a spatially developing bend, e.g., 90 deg, where both separation and upstream structures can be triggered and con-trolled. This is probably dif.cult to obtain experimentally, but a DNS of a 90 deg bend with upstream and downstream straight pipe sections could give some answers. Such a DNS is feasible and has been started recently [183,184]. The latter reference includes pre-liminary three-dimensional POD analysis of swirl switching. 

On the other hand, how the Dean vortices behave when an addi-tional motion (swirl and pulsation) is superimposed on turbulence is an unexplored area with a limited number of studies being available [17, 94,110,141,180]. In Ref. [180], PIV experiments of highly pulsating turbulent .ow in sharp bends revealed a vortex pattern varying from a single vortex at the end of deceleration to a ¡°steady-.ow-like¡± pattern at the peak of acceleration. Pulsating turbulent pipe .ow is generally neglected but when it comes to curved pipes, the available information is even more scarce. There is clearly an interest to study this complex .ow .eld for wider ranges of Reynolds and Womersley numbers as well as curvature ratios both in terms of statistics and secondary .ow behavior. 
From all the above, it is made clear that turbulent .ow in curved pipes is far from being fully understood, despite the great efforts done in the last decades. It is hence of both engineering and fundamental points of interest that further investigations are initiated. 
Acknowledgment 
The starting point of this review has been the doctoral thesis by the .rst author [185], which was supported by CCGEx and the Linne Flow Center. The .nal version was completed by the .rst author together with the co-authors as part of the postdoctoral period within the Fordonsstrategisk Forskning och Innovation (FFI) project entitled ¡°Experimental Investigation of the In-Cylinder Flow During the Intake Stroke.¡± This project is a cooper-ation between the Swedish Energy Agency, Scania CV AB, Volvo GTT, and KTH. The authors are thankful to Professor Philipp Schlatter, Dr. Azad Noorani, and MSc. Jacopo Canton from KTH Mechanics for useful discussions on curved pipe .ows. 
References 
[1] Bradshaw, P., 1973, ¡°Effects of Streamline Curvature on Turbulent Flow,¡± AGARDograph 
No. 
169. 
[2] Goldstein, S., 1938, Modern Developments in Fluid Mechanics, Oxford Uni-versity Press, Oxford, UK. 
[3] Schlichting, H., 1979, Boundary-Layer Theory, McGraw¨CHill, New York. 
[4] Ward-Smith, A. J., 1980, Internal Fluid Flow. The Fluid Dynamics of Flow in Pipes and Ducts, Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK. 
[5] Pedley, T. J., 1980, The 
Fluid 
Mechanics 
of 
Large 
Blood 
Vessels, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
[6] Berger, S. A., Talbot, L., and Yao, L. S., 1983, ¡°Flow in Curved Pipes,¡± Annu. 
Rev. 
Fluid 
Mech., 15(1), pp. 461¨C512. 
[7] Ito, H., 1987, ¡°Flow in Curved Pipes,¡± Bull. 
JSME, 30(262), pp. 543¨C552. 
[8] Spedding, P. L., and Benard, E., 2004, ¡°Fluid Flow Through 90 Degree Bends,¡± Dev. 
Chem. 
Eng. 
Miner. 
Process., 12(1¨C2), pp. 107¨C128. 
[9] Naphon, P., and Wongwises, S., 2006, ¡°A Review of Flow and Heat Transfer Characteristics in Curved Tubes,¡± Renewable 
Sustainable 
Energy 
Rev., 10(5), pp. 463¨C490. 
[10] Vashisth, S., Kumar, V., and Nigam, K. D. P., 2008, ¡°A Review on the Poten-tial Applications of Curved Geometries in Process Industry,¡± Ind. 
Eng. 
Chem. 
Res., 47(10), pp. 3291¨C3337. 
[11] Kundu, K. P., Cohen, M. I., and Dowling, R. D., 2012, Fluid Mechanics, 5th ed., Elsevier, Oxford, UK. 
[12] Dean, W. R., 1927, ¡°Note on the Motion of Fluid in a Curved Pipe,¡± Philos. 
Mag., 4(20), pp. 208¨C223. 
[13] Dean, W. R., 1928, ¡°The Stream-Line Motion of Fluid in a Curved Pipe,¡± Philos. 
Mag., 5(30), pp. 671¨C695. 
[14] McConalogue, D. J., and Srivastava, R. S., 1968, ¡°Motion of a Fluid in a Curved Tube,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 307(1488), pp. 37¨C53. 
[15] Taylor, G. I., 1929, ¡°The Criterion for Turbulence in Curved Pipes,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 124(794), pp. 243¨C249. 
[16] White, C. M., 1929, ¡°Streamline Flow Through Curved Pipes,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 123(792), pp. 645¨C663. 
[17] Anwer, M., and So, R. M. C., 1993, ¡°Swirling Turbulent Flow Through a Curved Pipe¡ªPart 1: Effect of Swirl and Bend Curvature,¡± Exp. 
Fluids, 14(1), pp. 85¨C96. 
[18] R€oder, W., 2001, ¡°Large-Eddy Simulations of
utten, F., Meinke, M., and Schr€90 deg Pipe Bend Flows,¡± J. 
Turbul., 2, p. N3. 
[19] Canton, J., Schlatter, P., and €u, R., 2016, ¡°Modal Instability of the Flow in
Orl€a Toroidal Pipe,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 792, pp. 894¨C909. 
[20] Cieslicki, K., and Piechna, A., 2012, ¡°Can the Dean Number Alone Character-ize Flow Similarity in Differently Bent Tubes?,¡± ASME 
J. 
Fluids 
Eng., 134(5), p. 051205. 
€R€
[21] Hagen, G., 1839, ¡°Uber die Bewegung des Wassers in engen zylindrischen 
ohr,¡± Poggendorff¡¯s Ann. Phys., 46, pp. 423¨C442. 
[22] Poiseuille, J. L. M., 1842, ¡°Recherches experimentales sur le mouvement des liquides dans les tubes de tres-petits diameters,¡± C. R. Chim., 11, pp. 961¨C967. 
[23] Darcy, H., 1857, Recherches experimentales relatives au mouvement de l¡¯eau dans les tuyaux, Mallet-Bachelier, Paris. 
[24] Darcy, H., 1856, Les fontaines publiques de la ville de Dijon, Dalmont, Paris. 
[25] Reynolds, O., 1883, ¡°An Experimental Investigation of the Circumstances Which Determine Whether the Motion of Water Shall Be Direct or Sinuous, and of the Law of Resistance in Parallel Channels,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc. 
London, 35(224¨C226), pp. 84¨C99. 
[26] Boussinesq, M. J., 1868, ¡°Memoire sur l¡¯in.uence des frottements dans les mouvements reguliers des .uids,¡± J. Math. Pures Appl., 13(2), pp. 377¨C424. 
[27] Thomson, J., 1876, ¡°On the Origin of Windings of Rivers in Alluvial Plains With Remarks on the Flow of Water Round Bends in Pipes,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 
25, pp. 5¨C8. 
[28] Thomson, J., 1877, ¡°Experimental Demonstration in Respect to the Origin of Windings of Rivers in Alluvial Plains, and to the Mode of Flow of Water Round Bends of Pipes,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 26(179¨C184), pp. 356¨C357. 
[29] Thomson, J., 1912, Collected Papers in Physics and Engineering, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
[30] Weisbach, J., 1855, Experimentelle Hydraulik, Engelhardt, Freiberg, Germany. 
[31] Williams, G. S., Hubbell, C. W., and Fenkell, G. H., 1902, ¡°Experiments at Detroit, MI, on the Effect of Curvature Upon the Flow of Water in Pipes,¡± Am. Soc. Civ. Eng., 47, pp. 1¨C196. 
[32] Eustice, J., 1910, ¡°Flow of Water in Curved Pipes,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 84(568), pp. 107¨C118. 
[33] Eustice, J., 1911, ¡°Experiments on Stream-Line Motion in Curved Pipes,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 85(576), pp. 119¨C131. 
[34] Dean, W. R., 1928, ¡°Fluid Motion in a Curved Channel,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 
121(787), pp. 402¨C420. 
[35] Nature, 1952, ¡°Mathematics at University College, London: Prof. W. R. Dean,¡± Nature, 169(4306), p. 779. 
[36] Faculty of Mathematics, University of Cambridge, Centre for Mathematical Sciences (personal communication), 2016. 
[37] Dean, W. R., and Hurst, J. M., 1959, ¡°Note on the Motion of Fluid in a Curved Pipe,¡± Mathematika, 6(1), pp. 77¨C85. 
[38] Binnie, A. M., 1978, ¡°Some Notes on the Study of Fluid Mechanics in Cam-bridge, England,¡± Annu. 
Rev. 
Fluid 
Mech., 10(1), pp. 1¨C11. 
[39] Finlay, W. H., Keller, J. B., and Ferziger, J. H., 1988, ¡°Instability and Transi-tion in Curved Channel Flow,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 194, pp. 417¨C456. 
[40] Matsson, O. J. E., and Alfredsson, P. H., 1992, ¡°Experiments on Instabilities in Curved Channel Flow,¡± Phys. 
Fluids 
A, 4(8), p. 1666. 
[41] Cohen, M., 2010, ¡°My Dear Eve...: The Remaining Letters From Eve¡¯s Ruth-erford File,¡± Fontanus, 12, pp. 1¨C10. 
[42] Batcheloris, M., 2006, ¡°Rutherford and the Trinity Golf Circus,¡± Phys. 
World, 19(1), p. 48. 
[43] Einstein, H. A., 1926, ¡°Die Ursache der M€aanderbildung der Flu.l€aufe und des sogenannten Baerschen Gesetzes,¡± Naturwissenschaften, 14(11), pp. 223¨C224. 
[44] Adler, M., 1934, ¡°Str€in ummten Rohren,¡± Z. 
Angew. 
Math.
omung gekr€Mech., 14(5), pp. 257¨C275. 
[45] Wattendorf, F. L., 1935, ¡°A Study of the Effect of Curvature on Fully Devel-oped Turbulent Flow,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 148(865), pp. 565¨C598. 
[46] Greenspan, D., 1973, ¡°Secondary Flow in a Curved Tube,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 
57(1), pp. 167¨C176. 
[47] Collins, W. M., and Dennis, S. C. R., 1975, ¡°The Steady Motion of a Viscous Fluid in a Curved Tube,¡± Q. 
J. 
Mech. 
Appl. 
Math., 28(2), pp. 133¨C156. 
[48] Van Dyke, M., 1978, ¡°Extended Stokes Series: Laminar Flow Through a Loosely Coiled Pipe,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 86(1), pp. 129¨C145. 
[49] Smith, F. T., 1976, ¡°Fluid Flow Into a Curved Pipe,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 351(1664), pp. 71¨C87. 
[50] Dennis, S. C. R., and Ng, M., 1982, ¡°Dual Solutions for Steady Laminar Flow Through a Curved Tube,¡± Q. 
J. 
Mech. 
Appl. 
Math., 35(3), pp. 305¨C324. 
[51] Dennis, S. C. R., and Riley, N., 1991, ¡°On the Fully Developed Flow in a Curved Pipe at Large Dean Number,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 434(1891), pp. 473¨C478. 
[52] Ito, H., 1959, ¡°Friction Factors for Turbulent Flow in Curved Pipes,¡± ASME J. Basic Eng., 81(2), pp. 123¨C134. 
[53] Keulegan, G. H., and Beij, K. H., 1937, ¡°Pressure Losses for Fluid Flow in Curved Pipes,¡± J. 
Res. 
Natl. 
Bur. 
Stand., 18(1), pp. 89¨C114. 

[54] Srinivasan, P. S., Nandapurkar, S. S., and Holland, F. A., 1970, ¡°Friction Fac-tors for Coils,¡± Trans. Inst. Chem. Eng., 48(4¨C6), pp. 156¨C161. 
[55] Sreenivasan, K. R., and Strykowski, P. J., 1983, ¡°Stabilization Effects in Flow Through Helically Coiled Pipes,¡± Exp. 
Fluids, 1(1), pp. 31¨C36. 
[56] Viswanath, P. R., and Narasimha, R., 1978, ¡°Visualisation of Relaminarizing Flows,¡± J. Indian Sci., 60, pp. 159¨C165. 
[57] Narasimha, R., and Sreenivasan, K. R., 1979, ¡°Relaminarization of Fluid Flows,¡± Adv. 
Appl. 
Mech., 19, pp. 221¨C308. 
[58] Kurokawa, M., Cheng, K. C., and Shi, L., 1998, ¡°Flow Visualization of Rela-minarization Phenomena in Curved Pipes and Related Measurements,¡± J. 
Vis-
ualization, 1(1), pp. 9¨C28. 
[59] Webster, D. R., and Humphrey, J. A. C., 1993, ¡°Experimental Observations of Flow Instability in a Helical Coil (Data Bank Contribution),¡± ASME 
J. 
Fluids 
Eng., 115(3), pp. 436¨C443. 
[60] Webster, D. R., and Humphrey, J. A. C., 1997, ¡°Traveling Wave Instability in Helical Coil Flow,¡± Phys. 
Fluids, 9(2), p. 407. 
[61] Di Piazza, I., and Ciofalo, M., 2011, ¡°Transition to Turbulence in Toroidal Pipes,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 687, pp. 72¨C117. 
[62] K€uhnen, J., Braunshier, P., Schwegel, M., Kuhlmann, H. C., and Hof, B., 2015, ¡°Subcritical Versus Supercritical Transition to Turbulence in Curved Pipes,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 770, p. R3. 
[63] K€uhnen, J., 2012, ¡°Experimental Investigation of Transition to Turbulence in a Torus,¡± Ph.D. 
thesis, Technical University Wien, Wien, Austria. 
[64] K€uhnen, J., Holzner, M., Hof, B., and Kuhlmann, H., 2014, ¡°Experimental Investigation of Transitional Flow in a Toroidal Pipe,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 738, pp. 463¨C491. 
[65] Cioncolini, A., and Santini, L., 2006, ¡°An Experimental Investigation Regard-ing the Laminar to Turbulent Flow Transition in Helically Coiled Pipes,¡± Exp. 
Therm. 
Fluid 
Sci., 30(4), pp. 367¨C380. 
[66] Kubair, V., and Varrier, C. B. S., 1961, ¡°Pressure Drop for Liquid Flow in Helical Coils,¡± Trans. Indian Inst. Chem. Eng., 14, p. 93. 
[67] Noorani, A., and Schlatter, P., 2015, ¡°Evidence of Sublaminar Drag Naturally Occurring in a Curved Pipe,¡± Phys. 
Fluids, 27(3), p. 035105. 
[68] Alexander, C. W. L., 1905, ¡°The Resistance Offered to the Flow of Water in Pipes by Bends and Elbows,¡± Minutes Proc. Inst. Civ, Eng., 159, pp. 341¨C364. 
[69] Grindley, J. H., and Gibson, A. H., 1908, ¡°On the Frictional Resistances to the Flow of Air Through a Pipe,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 80(536), pp. 114¨C139. 
€
[70] Nippert, H., 1929, ¡°Uber den str€ummten kan€omungsverlust in gekr€alen,¡± Ph.D. thesis, Technischen Hochschule der Freien Stadt Danzig, Danzig, Germany. 
[71] Richter, H., 1930, ¡°Der Druckabfall in gekr€ummten glatten Rohrleitungen,¡± VDI Forschungsh., 338. 
[72] Jeschke, H., 1925, ¡°W€arme€ubergang und Druckverlust in Rohrschlangen,¡± VDI Z., 506, pp. 24¨C28. 
[73] Schmidt, E. F., 1967, ¡°W€arme€ubergang und Druckverlust in Rohrschlangen,¡± Chem. 
Ing. 
Tech., 39(13), pp. 781¨C789. 
[74] Wasielewski, R., 1932, ¡°Verluste in glatten Rohrkr€ulmmern mit kreisrundem Querschnitt bei weniger als 908 Ablenkung,¡± Mitt. Hydraul. Inst. Techn. Hochsch. M€unchen, 5, pp. 53¨C67. 
[75] Barua, S. N., 1963, ¡°On Secondary Flow in Stationary Curved Pipes,¡± Q. 
J. 
Mech. 
Appl. 
Math., 16(1), pp. 61¨C77. 
[76] Ito, H., 1960, ¡°Pressure Losses in Smooth Pipe Bends,¡± ASME 
J. 
Basic 
Eng., 82(1), pp. 131¨C140. 
[77] Beck, C., 1960, ¡°Discussion: Pressure Losses in Smooth Pipe Bends,¡± ASME 

J. Basic 
Eng., 82(1), pp. 140¨C142. 
[78] Pigott, R. J. S., 1957, ¡°Losses in Pipe and Fittings,¡± Trans. ASME, 79, pp. 1767¨C1783. 
[79] Ward-Smith, A. J., 1971, Pressure Losses in Ducted Flows, Butterworth, London. 
[80] Ali, S., 2001, ¡°Pressure Drop Correlations for Flow Through Regular Helical Coil Tubes,¡± Fluid 
Dyn. 
Res., 28(4), pp. 295¨C310. 
[81] Noorani, A., El Khoury, G. K., and Schlatter, P., 2013, ¡°Evolution of Turbu-lence Characteristics From Straight to Curved Pipes,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 41(ETMM9), pp. 16¨C26. 
[82] Weske, J. R., 1948, ¡°Experimental Investigation of Velocity Distributions Downstream of Single Duct Bends,¡± Report 
No. 
NACA-TN-1471. 
[83] Detra, R. W., 1953, ¡°The Secondary Flow in Curved Pipes,¡± Ph.D. 
thesis, The Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, Switzerland. 
[84] Sudo, K., Sumida, M., and Hibara, H., 2000, ¡°Experimental Investigation on Turbulent Flow Through a Circular-Sectioned 180 Bend,¡± Exp. 
Fluids, 28(1), pp. 51¨C57. 
[85] Enayet, M. M., Gibson, M. M., Taylor, A., and Yianneskis, M., 1982, ¡°Laser-Doppler Measurements of Laminar and Turbulent Flow in a Pipe Bend,¡± Int. 

J. Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 3(4), pp. 213¨C219. 
[86] Azzola, J., Humprey, J. A. C., Iacovides, H., and Launder, B. E., 1986, ¡°Developing Turbulent Flow in a U-Bend of Circular Cross-Section: Measure-ment and Computation,¡± ASME 
J. 
Fluids 
Eng., 108(2), pp. 214¨C221. 
[87] Sudo, K., Sumida, M., and Hibara, H., 1998, ¡°Experimental Investigation on Turbulent Flow in a Circular-Sectioned 90-Degree Bend,¡± Exp. 
Fluids, 25(1), pp. 42¨C49. 
[88] Anwer, M., So, R. M. C., and Lai, Y. G., 1989, ¡°Perturbation by and Recovery From Bend Curvature of a Fully Developed Turbulent Pipe Flow,¡± Phys. 
Flu-
ids 
A, 1(8), p. 1387. 
[89] Hellstr€om, L. H. O., Zlatinov, M., and Smits, A. J., 2011, ¡°Turbulent Pipe Flow Through a 90 deg Bend,¡± 7th International Symposium on Turbulence and Shear Flow Phenomena, Ottawa, Canada, July 28¨C31. 
[90] Rowe, M., 1970, ¡°Measurements and Computations of Flow in Pipe Bends,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 43(4), pp. 771¨C783. 
[91] Lee, G. H., Choi, Y. D., and Han, S. H., 2007, ¡°Measurement of Developing Turbulent Flow in a U-Bend of Circular Cross-Section,¡± J. 
Mech. 
Sci. 
Tech-
nol., 21(2), pp. 348¨C359. 
[92] Anwer, M., and So, R. M. C., 1990, ¡°Frequency of Sublayer Bursting in a Curved Bend,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 210, pp. 415¨C435. 
[93] Alfredsson, P. H., and Johansson, A. V., 1984, ¡°On the Detection of Turbulence-Generating Events,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 139, p. 325. 
[94] Pruvost, J., Legrand, J., and Legentilhomme, P., 2004, ¡°Numerical Investiga-tion of Bend and Torus Flows¡ªPart I: Effect of Swirl Motion on Flow Struc-ture in U-Bend,¡± Chem. 
Eng. 
Sci., 59(16), pp. 3345¨C3357. 
[95] Hellstr€
om, F., and Fuchs, L., 2007, ¡°Numerical Computations of Steady and Unsteady Flow in Bended Pipes,¡± AIAA 
Paper No. 2007-4350. 
[96] Wilcox, D. C., 1994, ¡°Turbulence Modeling for CFD,¡± DCW Industries, La Ca~
nada Flintridge, CA. 
[97] Durbin, P. A., and Pettersson-Reif, B. A., 2011, Statistical 
Theory 
and 
Model-
ing 
for 
Turbulent 
Flows, 2nd ed., Wiley, Chichester, UK. 
[98] Wallin, S., and Johansson, A. V., 2002, ¡°Modelling Streamline Curvature Effects in Explicit Algebraic Reynolds Stress Turbulence Models,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 23(5), pp. 721¨C730. 
[99] Noorani, A., 2015, ¡°Particle-Laden Turbulent Wall-Bounded Flows in Moder-ately Complex Geometries,¡± Ph.D. 
thesis, KTH Mechanics, Stockholm, Sweden. 
[100] R€ohrig, R., Jakirlic, S., and Tropea, C., 2015, ¡°Comparative Computational Study of Turbulent Flow in a 90 deg Pipe Elbow,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 
55(ETMM10), pp. 102¨C111. 
[101] Patankar, S. V., Pratap, V. S., and Spalding, D. B., 1975, ¡°Prediction of Turbu-lent Flow in Curved Pipes,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 67(3), pp. 583¨C595. 
[102] Mori, Y., and Nakayama, W., 1967, ¡°Study of Forced Convective Heat Trans-fer in Curved Pipes (2nd Report, Turbulent Region),¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Mass 
Trans-
fer, 10(1), pp. 37¨C59. 
[103] Al-Rafai, W. N., Tridimas, Y. D., and Woolley, N. H., 1990, ¡°A Study of Turbu-lent Flows in Pipe Bends,¡± Proc. 
Inst. 
Mech. 
Eng., 
Part 
C, 204(6), pp. 399¨C408. 
[104] Hilgenstock, A., and Ernst, R., 1996, ¡°Analysis of Installation Effects by Means of Computational Fluid Dynamics¡ªCFD Versus Experiments?,¡± Flow 
Meas. 
Instrum., 7(3¨C4), pp. 161¨C171. 
[105] Sugiyama, H., and Hitomi, D., 2005, ¡°Numerical Analysis of Developing Tur-bulent Flow in a 180 deg Bend Tube by an Algebraic Reynolds Stress Model,¡± Int. 
J. 
Numer. 
Methods 
Fluids, 47(12), pp. 1431¨C1449. 
[106] Pellegrini, M., Endo, H., and Ninokata, H., 2011, ¡°Numerical Investigation of Bent Pipe Flows at Transitional Reynolds Number,¡± Prog. 
Nucl. 
Energy, 53(7), pp. 916¨C920. 
[107] Di Piazza, I., and Ciofalo, M., 2010, ¡°Numerical Prediction of Turbulent Flow and Heat Transfer in Helically Coiled Pipes,¡± Int. 
J. 
Therm. 
Sci., 49(4), pp. 653¨C663. 
[108] Bradshaw, P., 1987, ¡°Turbulent Secondary Flows,¡± Annu. 
Rev. 
Fluid 
Mech., 19(1), pp. 53¨C74. 
[109] Lai, Y., So, R. M. C., and Zhang, H. S., 1991, ¡°Turbulence-Driven Secondary Flows in a Curved Pipe,¡± Theor. 
Comput. 
Fluid 
Dyn., 3(3), pp. 163¨C180. 
[110] Kalpakli, A., and €u, R., 2013, ¡°Turbulent Pipe Flow Downstream a 90 degOrl€Pipe Bend With and Without Superimposed Swirl,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 41(ETMM9), pp. 103¨C111. 
[111] Boersma, B. J., and Nieuwstadt, F. T. M., 1996, ¡°Direct Numerical Simulation of the Flow in a Bend,¡± 3rd International Symposium on Engineering Turbulence Modelling and Measurement, Heraklion, Greece, May 27¨C29. 
[112] Boersma, B. J., and Nieuwstadt, F. T. M., 1996, ¡°Large-Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flow in a Curved Pipe,¡± ASME 
J. 
Fluids 
Eng., 118(2), p. 248. 
[113] R€oder, W., and Meinke, M., 2005, ¡°Large-Eddy Simulation ofutten, F., Schr€Low Frequency Oscillations of the Dean Vortices in Turbulent Pipe Bend Flows,¡± Phys. 
Fluids, 17(3), p. 035107. 
[114] Tan, L., Zhu, B., Wang, Y., Cao, S., and Liang, K., 2014, ¡°Turbulent Flow Simulation Using Large Eddy Simulation Combined With Characteristic-Based Split Scheme,¡± Comput. 
Fluids, 94, pp. 161¨C172. 
[115] Wang, Y., Dong, Q., and Wang, P., 2015, ¡°Numerical Investigation on Fluid Flow in a 90-Degree Curved Pipe With Large Curvature Ratio,¡± Math. 
Probl. 
Eng., 2015, p. 548262. 
[116] Boersma, B. J., and Nieuwstadt, F. T. M., 1997, ¡°Non-Unique Solutions in Turbulent Curved Pipe Flow,¡± Direct 
and 
Large-Eddy 
Simulation 
II, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 257¨C266. 
[117] H€uttl, T. J., and Friedrich, R., 2000, ¡°In.uence of Curvature and Torsion on Turbulent Flow in Helically Coiled Pipes,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 21(3), pp. 345¨C353. 
[118] Germano, M., 1982, ¡°On the Effect of Torsion on a Helical Pipe Flow,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 125, pp. 1¨C8. 
[119] Germano, M., 1989, ¡°The Dean Equations Extended to a Helical Pipe Flow,¡± 
J. Fluid 
Mech., 203, pp. 289¨C305. 
[120] Yamamoto, K., Akita, T., Ikeuchi, H., and Kita, Y., 1995, ¡°Experimental Study of the Flow in a Helical Circular Tube,¡± Fluid 
Dyn. 
Res., 16(4), pp. 237¨C249. 
[121] Noorani, A., and Schlatter, P., 2015, ¡°Swirl-Switching Phenomenon in Turbu-lent Flow Through Toroidal Pipes,¡± 9th International Symposium on Turbu-lence and Shear Flow Phenomena, TSFP9, Melbourne, Australia, June 30¨CJuly 3. 
[122] H€uttl, T. J., and Friedrich, R., 2001, ¡°Direct Numerical Simulation of Turbu-lent Flows in Curved and Helically Coiled Pipes,¡± Comput. 
Fluids, 30(5), pp. 591¨C605. 
[123] Di Liberto, M., Di Piazza, I., and Ciofalo, M., 2013, ¡°Turbulence Structure and Budgets in Curved Pipes,¡± Comput. 
Fluids, 88, pp. 452¨C472. 

[124] Carlsson, C., Alenius, E., and Fuchs, L., 2015, ¡°Swirl Switching in Turbulent Flow Through 90 deg Pipe Bends,¡± Phys. 
Fluids, 27(8), p. 085112. 
[125] Kalpakli Vester, A., €u, R., and Alfredsson, P. H., 2015, ¡°POD Analysis of
Orl€the Turbulent Flow Downstream a Mild and Sharp Bend,¡± Exp. 
Fluids, 56(3), pp. 57¨C15. 
[126] Hellstr€
om, L. H. O., Zlatinov, M., Cao, G., and Smits, A. J., 2013, ¡°Turbulent Pipe Flow Downstream of a 90 deg Bend,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 735, p. R7. 
[127] Ono, A., Kimura, N., Kamide, H., and Tobita, A., 2010, ¡°In.uence of Elbow Curvature on Flow Structure at Elbow Outlet Under High Reynolds Number Condition,¡± Nucl. 
Eng. 
Des., 241(NURETH-13), pp. 4409¨C4419. 
[128] Sakakibara, J., and Machida, N., 2012, ¡°Measurement of Turbulent Flow Upstream and Downstream of a Circular Pipe Bend,¡± Phys. 
Fluids, 24(4), p. 041702. 
[129] Tunstall, M. J., and Harvey, J. K., 1968, ¡°On the Effect of a Sharp Bend in a Fully Developed Turbulent Pipe-Flow,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 34(3), pp. 595¨C608. 
[130] Br€
ucker, C., 1998, ¡°A Time-Recording DPIV-Study of the Swirl Switching Effect in a 90 Bend Flow,¡± 8th 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Flow 
Visualiza-
tion, Sorrento, Italy, Sept. 1¨C4, p. 171. 
[131] Kalpakli, A., €u, R., and Alfredsson, P. H., 2012, ¡°Dean Vortices in Turbu-
Orl€lent Flows: Rocking or Rolling?,¡± J. 
Visualization, 15(1), pp. 37¨C38. 
[132] Sakakibara, J., Sonobe, R., Goto, H., Tezuka, H., Tada, H., and Tezuka, K., 2010, ¡°Stereo-PIV Study of Turbulent Flow Downstream of a Bend in a Round Pipe,¡± 14th International Symposium on Flow Visualization, EXCO, Daegu, South Korea, June 21¨C24. 
[133] Berkooz, G., Holmes, P., and Lumley, J. L., 1993, ¡°The Proper Orthogonal Decomposition in the Analysis of Turbulent Flows,¡± Annu. 
Rev. 
Fluid 
Mech., 
25(1), pp. 539¨C575. 
[134] Raiola, M., Discetti, S., and Ianiro, A., 2015, ¡°On PIV Random Error Minimization With Optimal POD-Based Low-Order Reconstruction,¡± Exp. 
Fluids, 56(4), p. 75. 
[135] Guala, M., Hommema, S. E., and Adrian, R. J., 2006, ¡°Large-Scale and Very-Large-Scale Motions in Turbulent Pipe Flow,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 554, pp. 521¨C542. 
[136] Shiraishi, T., Watakabe, H., Sago, H., and Yamano, H., 2009. ¡°Pressure Fluc-tuation Characteristics of the Short-Radius Elbow Pipe for FBR in the Postcrit-ical Reynolds Regime,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Sci. 
Technol., 4(2), pp. 430¨C441. 
[137] Takamura, H., Konno, H., Hashizume, H., Aizawa, K., and Yamano, H., 2011. ¡°PIV Measurements of a Complex Turbulent Flow in a Short Elbow Piping Under a High Reynolds Number Condition,¡± 9th International Symposium on PIV, PIV¡¯11, Tsukuba, Japan, July 21¨C23. 
[138] Yamano, H., Tanaka, M., Murakami, T., Iwamoto, Y., Yuki, K., Sago, H., and Hayakawa, S., 2011. ¡°Unsteady Elbow Pipe Flow to Develop a Flow-Induced Vibration Evaluation Methodology for Japan Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactor,¡± J. 
Nucl. 
Sci. 
Technol., 
48(4), pp. 677¨C687. 
[139] Fj€allman, J., Mihaescu, M., and Fuchs, L., 2013, ¡°Analysis of Secondary Flow Induced by a 90 deg Bend in a Pipe Using Mode Decomposition Techniques,¡± 4th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Jets, 
Wakes, 
and 
Separated 
Flows, Nagoya, Japan, Sept. 17¨C21. 
[140] Yuki, K., Hasegawa, S., Sato, T., Hashizume, H., Aizawa, K., and Yamano, H., 2011, ¡°Matched Refractive-Index PIV Visualization of Complex Flow Structure in a Three-Dimensionally Connected Dual Elbow,¡± Nucl. 
Eng. 
Des., 241(11), pp. 4544¨C4550. 
[141] Kalpakli Vester, A., Sattarzadeh, S. S., and €u, R., 2016, ¡°Combined Hot-
Orl€Wire and PIV Measurements of a Swirling Turbulent Flow at the Exit of a 90 deg Pipe Bend,¡± J. 
Visualization, 19(2), pp. 261¨C273. 
[142] €u, Studies Jet and Zero Pressure-
Orl€R., 2009, ¡°Experimental in Flows Gradient Turbulent Boundary Layers,¡± Ph.D. 
thesis, KTH Mechanics, Stock-holm, Sweden. 
[143] Gupta, A. K., Lilley, D. G., and Syred, N., 1985, Swirl Flows, ABACUS Press, Cambridge, MA. 
[144] Facciolo, L., Tillmark, N., Talamelli, A., and Alfredsson, P. H., 2007, ¡°A Study of Swirling Turbulent Pipe and Jet Flows,¡± Phys. 
Fluids, 19(3), p. 035105. 
[145] White, A., 1964, ¡°Flow of a Fluid in an Axially Rotating Pipe,¡± J. 
Mech. 
Eng. 
Sci., 6(1), pp. 47¨C52. 
[146] Murakami, M., and Kikuyama, K., 1980, ¡°Turbulent Flow in Axially Rotating Pipes,¡± ASME 
J. 
Fluids 
Eng., 102(1), pp. 97¨C103. 
[147] Reich, G., and Beer, H., 1989, ¡°Fluid Flow and Heat Transfer in an Axially Rotating Pipe¡ªI: Effect of Rotation on Turbulent Pipe Flow,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Mass 
Transfer, 32(3), pp. 551¨C562. 
[148] Kikuyama, K., Murakami, M., Nishibori, K., and Maeda, K., 1983, ¡°Flow in an Axially Rotating Pipe: A Calculation of Flow in the Saturated Region,¡± Bull. 
JSME, 26(214), pp. 506¨C513. 
[149] Imao, S., Itoh, M., and Harada, T., 1996, ¡°Turbulent Characteristics of the Flow in an Axially Rotating Pipe,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 17(5), pp. 444¨C451. 
[150] Kikuyama, K., Murakami, M., and Nishibori, K., 1983, ¡°Development of Three-Dimensional Turbulent Boundary Layer in an Axially Rotating Pipe,¡± ASME 
J. 
Fluids 
Eng., 105(2), pp. 154¨C160. 
[151] Rocklage-Marliani, G., Schmidts, M., and Vasanta Ram, V., 2003, ¡°Three-Dimensional Laser-Doppler Velocimetry Measurements in Swirling Turbulent Pipe Flow,¡± Flow 
Turbul. 
Combust., 70(1), pp. 43¨C67. 
[152] Eggels, J., 1994, ¡°Direct and Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flow in a Cylindrical Geometry,¡± Ph.D. thesis, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands. 
[153] Orlandi, P., and Fatica, M., 1997, ¡°Direct Simulations of Turbulent Flow in a Pipe Rotating About Its Axis,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 343, pp. 43¨C72. 
[154] Feiz, A. A., Ould-Rouis, M., and Lauriat, G., 2003, ¡°Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flow in a Rotating Pipe,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 24(3), pp. 412¨C420. 
[155] Speziale, C. G., Younis, B. A., and Berger, S. A., 2000, ¡°Analysis and Model-ling of Turbulent Flow in an Axially Rotating Pipe,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 407, pp. 1¨C26. 
[156] Nygard, F., and Andersson, H. I., 2009, ¡°DNS of Swirling Turbulent Pipe Flow,¡± Int. 
J. 
Numer. 
Methods. 
Fluids, 64(9), pp. 945¨C972. 
[157] So, R., and Anwer, M., 1993, ¡°Fully-Developed Turbulent Flow Through a Curved Pipe With and Without Swirl,¡± ASME 
Publ. 
FED, 146, pp. 29¨C43. 
[158] So, R. M. C., and Anwer, M., 1993, ¡°Swirling Turbulent Flow Through a Curved Pipe¡ªPart 2: Recovery From Swirl and Bend Curvature,¡± Exp. 
Fluids, 
14(3), pp. 169¨C177. 
[159] Hellstr€
om, L. H. O., Sinha, A., and Smits, A. J., 2011, ¡°Visualizing the Very-Large-Scale Motions in Turbulent Pipe Flow,¡± Phys. 
Fluids, 23(1), p. 011703. 
[160] Binnie, A. M., 1962, ¡°Experiments on the Swirling Flow of Water in a Verti-cal Pipe and a Bend,¡± Proc. 
R. 
Soc., 270(1343), pp. 452¨C466. 
[161] Shimizu, Y., and Sugino, K., 1980, ¡°Hydraulic Losses and Flow Patterns of a Swirling Flow in U-Bends,¡± Bull. 
JSME, 23(183), pp. 1443¨C1450. 
[162] Kitoh, O., 1987, ¡°Swirling Flow Through a Bend,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 175, pp. 429¨C446. 
[163] Chang, T. H., and Lee, H. S., 2003, ¡°An Experimental Study on Swirling Flow in a 90 Degree Circular Tube by Using Particle Image Velocimetry,¡± J. 
Visual-
ization, 6(4), pp. 343¨C352. 
[164] McDonald, D. A., 1955, ¡°The Relation of Pulsatile Pressure to Flow in Arteries,¡± J. 
Physiol., 127(3), p. 533. 
[165] Chandran, K. B., and Yearwood, T. L., 1981, ¡°Experimental Study of Physiological Pulsatile Flow in a Curved Tube,¡± J. 
Fluid 
Mech., 111, pp. 59¨C85. 
[166] Glenn, A. L., Bulusu, K., Shu, F., and Plesniak, M. W., 2012, ¡°Secondary Flow Structures Under Stent-Induced Perturbations for Cardio-vascular Flow in a Curved Artery Model,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 
35(TSFP-7), pp. 76¨C83. 
[167] Stokes, G. G., 1851, ¡°On the Effect of the Internal Friction of Fluids on the Motion of Pendulums,¡± Trans. 
Cambridge 
Philos. 
Soc., 9,p.8. 
[168] He, S., and Jackson, J. D., 2009, ¡°An Experimental Study of Pulsating Turbu-lent Flow in a Pipe,¡± Eur. 
J. 
Mech. 
B/Fluids, 28(2), pp. 309¨C320. 
[169] Womersley, J., 1957, ¡°Oscillatory Flow in Arteries: The Constrained Elastic Tube as a Model of Arterial Flow and Pulse Transmission,¡± Phys. 
Med. 
Biol., 2(2), pp. 178¨C187. 
[170] Scotti, A., and Piomelli, U., 2001, ¡°Numerical Simulation of Pulsating Turbu-lent Channel Flow,¡± Phys. 
Fluids, 13(5), pp. 1367¨C1384. 
[171] Carpinlioglu, M. €undogdu, M. Y., 2001, ¡°A Critical Review on Pul-
O., and G€satile Pipe Flow Studies Directing Towards Future Research Topics,¡± Flow 
Meas. 
Instrum., 12(3), pp. 163¨C174. 
[172] Zohir, A. E., Abdel Aziz, A. A., and Habib, M. A., 2015, ¡°Heat Transfer Char-acteristics and Pressure Drop of the Concentric Tube Equipped With Coiled Wires for Pulsating Turbulent Flow,¡± Exp. 
Therm. 
Fluid 
Sci., 65, pp. 41¨C51. 
[173] Guo, L., Chen, X., Feng, Z., and Bai, B., 1998, ¡°Transient Convective Heat Transfer in a Helical Coiled Tube With Pulsatile Fully Developed Turbulent Flow,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Mass 
Transfer, 41(19), pp. 2867¨C2875. 
[174] Ramezani Kharvani, H., Ilami Doshmanziari, F., Zohir, A. E., and Jalali-Vahid, D., 2016, ¡°An Experimental Investigation of Heat Transfer in a Spiral-Coil Tube With Pulsating Turbulent Water Flow,¡± Heat 
Mass 
Transfer, 52(9), pp. 1779¨C1789. 
[175] Timite, B., Castelain, C., and Peerhossaini, H., 2010, ¡°Pulsatile Viscous Flow in a Curved Pipe: Effects of Pulsation on the Development of Secondary Flow,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 31(5), pp. 879¨C896. 
[176] Jarrahi, M., Castelain, C., and Peerhossaini, H., 2010, ¡°Secondary Flow Pat-terns and Mixing in Laminar Pulsating Flow Through a Curved Pipe,¡± Exp. 
Fluids, 50(6), pp. 1539¨C1558. 
€
[177] Kalpakli, A., Orlu,€R., Tillmark, N., and Alfredsson, P. H., 2012, 
¡°Experimental Investigation on the Effect of Pulsations on Exhaust Manifold-Related Flows Aiming at Improved Ef.ciency,¡± 10th International Conference on Turbochargers and Turbocharging (IMechE), London, May 15¨C16, pp. 377¨C387. 
[178] Laurantzon, F., Tillmark, N., €u, R., and Alfredsson, P. H., 2012, ¡°A Flow
Orl€Facility for the Characterization of Pulsatile Flows,¡± Flow 
Meas. 
Instrum., 26, pp. 10¨C17. 
[179] Laurantzon, F., €u, R., Segalini, A., Tillmark, N., and Alfredsson, P. H.,
Orl€2012, ¡°Experimental Analysis of Turbocharger Interaction With a Pulsatile Flow Through Time-Resolved Flow Measurements Upstream and Down-stream the Turbine,¡± 10th International Conference on Turbochargers and Tur-bocharging (IMechE), London, May 15¨C16, pp. 405¨C415. 
€
[180] Kalpakli, A., Orlu,€R., and Alfredsson, P. H., 2013, ¡°Vortical Patterns in Turbulent Flow Downstream a 90 deg Curved Pipe at High Womersley Numbers,¡± Int. 
J. 
Heat 
Fluid 
Flow, 44, pp. 692¨C699. 
[181] Kalpakli Vester, A., €u, R., and Alfredsson, P. H., 2015, ¡°Pulsatile Turbu-
Orl€lent Flow in Straight and Curved Pipes¡ªInterpretation and Decomposition of Hot-Wire Signals,¡± Flow 
Turbul. 
Combust., 94(2), pp. 305¨C321. 
[182] Noorani, A., and Schlatter, P., 2016, ¡°Swirl-Switching Phenomenon in Turbu-lent Flow Through Toroidal Pipes,¡± Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow (in press). 
[183] Yongmann, C., 2015, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK (personal communication). 
[184] Hufnagel, L., 2016, ¡°On the Swirl-Switching in Developing Bent Pipe Flow With Direct Numerical Simulation,¡± MSc. thesis, KTH Mechanics, Stock-holm, Sweden. 
[185] Kalpakli Vester, A., 2014, ¡°Vortices in Turbulent Curved Pipe Flow¡ª Rocking, Rolling and Pulsating Motions,¡± Ph.D. 
thesis, KTH Mechanics, Stockholm, Sweden. 



