High-temperature gas-phase kinetics of the thermal decomposition of tetramethoxysilane
ABSTRACT
The decomposition of tetramethoxysilane (Si(OCH3)4, TMOS) was studied in shock-tube experiments in the 1131每1610 K temperature range at pressures ranging from 1.9 to 2.3 bar behind reflected shock waves combining gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) and high-repetition-rate time-of-flight mass spectrometry (HRR-TOF-MS). The initial reaction is a four-center elimination to form methanol. At elevated temperatures, TMOS also decomposes via a O每C bond scission forming a methyl (CH3) and the corresponding OSi(OCH3)3 radical. The main observed products were methane (CH4), methanol (CH3OH), ethylene (C2H4), and ethane (C2H6). The yields of these products increase with temperature. mechanism contains 13 silicon species and 24 reactions with silicon-containing species. It was combined with the methanol mechanism of Burke et al. The measured global rate constant for TMOS decomposition was found to be koverall[TMOS products].
INTRODUCTION
Silicon dioxide (SiO2) is widely used as a coating material and additive because of its chemical stability, hardness, transparency in the visible spectrum, and high resistivity. It is the basis for production of ultra-pure optical glass and a major application in the semiconductor industry is the use as an electrically insulating layer. Tetram-ethoxysilane (TMOS) is the simplest homolog in the group of the alkoxylsilanes Si(OR)4 and is used as a precursor for SiO2 coatings deposited through chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and is used for flame-based nanoparticle synthesis. For process development, the kinetics of chemical composition and primary reactions must be understood. There is a variety of potential precursors for high-temperature synthesis of SiO2, such as tetraethoxysilane (TEOS), hexamethyldisiloxane (HMDSO), and octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane (D4). Therefore, the dependence of the reactivity on the molecular structure is of interest when selecting precursors and process conditions for specific applications. This paper aims at providing experimental kinetics data and developing and validating a kinetics mechanism for the decomposition of TMOS and the following products formation in a wide range of temperatures.
Chu et al. studied the decomposition kinetics of TMOS by Fourier-transform infrared spectrometry (FTIR) in a static cell at temperatures between 858 and 968 K and a pressure of 930 mbar. They obtained the following overall first-order rate coefficient for the consumption of TMOS
reported that TMOS was consumed to a significant extent by bimolecular reactions and indicated that H atoms have the largest impact on the TMOS consumption. They developed a mechanism based on quantum-chemical calculations and assumed two rate-controlling reactions: TMOS CH3OH (CH3O)2SiOCH2 and CH2OSi(OCH3)3 CH2O Si(OCH3)3. Their model accounts semi-quantitatively for the formation of the secondary products. Similar experiments have recently also addressed oxygenfree silicon precursors such as tetramethylsilane (Si(CH3)4, TMS).
In the present work, experiments were carried out in a single-pulse shock tube coupled to gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) that enables concentration measurements of stable products in a conventional shock tube. The shock tube is also coupled to high-repetition-rate time-of-flight mass spectrometry (HRR-TOF-MS) for time-resolved concentration measurements of multiple species including intermediates from gases continuously sampled from the shock tube. This time-resolved information provides an important additional constraint for the development of reaction mechanisms. The sensitive GC/MS technique enables experiments with low reactant concentrations (250每1200 ppm) and permits the use of chemical inhibitors in large excess to suppress bi molecular reactions. In contrast, the measurements with HRR-TOF-MS require reactant concentrations in the 0.25每0.5% range. 
METHOD
The experiments were performed in a stainlesssteel shock-tube with an inner diameter of 80 mm and a total length of 8.8 m. The shock tube consists of a driver section with a length of 2.5 m and the driven section of 6.3 m, both sections are separated from each other by an aluminum diaphragm with thicknesses of 30每70 米m depending on the target temperature. To operate the shock tube in singlepulse mode, the driven section is equipped with a 0.35 m3 dump tank, which can be separated from the shock tube by a ball valve (60 mm inner diameter). In single-pulse mode, the dump tank is filled with nitrogen (N2) at the same filling pressures (50每150 mbar) as the driven section and the valve is opened just before an experiment is performed. The driver and driven sections were connected to a four-stage rotary pump (Edwards dry star, Model QDP 80) combined with a mechanical booster pump (Edwards, EH 500A) to achieve a final pressure of 3 10?3 mbar. The initial pressure p1 of the test gas in the driven section was measured using a capacitance manometer (Edwards, Trans 600 AB). The velocity of the shock wave was determined using a set of four pressure transducers (Kistler, 603B) placed at the end of the driven section in equidistant intervals of 150 mm and the velocity was extrapolated to the end plate of the driven section with an observed attenuation of less than 1%. The conditions of the gas behind the reflected shock wave (temperature T5 and pressure p5) were calculated from the shock-wave velocities using the standard ideal gas shock-wave relations with uncertainties in the calculated temperature around 15 K. A fifth pressure transducer (PCB, 112A05) was positioned 20 mm away from the end plate. For further details of the experimental facility, see Ref.
All mixtures were prepared in a 50l stainlesssteel vessel and stirred for at least four hours. A turbomolecular pump (Pfeiffer, TMH 071 P) evacuated the vessel down to a pressure of 7 10?7 mbar. Depending on the detection technique, Ar or Ne was used as bath gas (s. Table 1). In one set of experiments, toluene was used as a chemical inhibitor, which suppresses secondary reactions of reactive hydrogen atoms and methyl radicals formed during TMOS pyrolysis. In this case, toluene (C6H5每CH3) scavenges the formed radicals and permits to study the decomposition of TMOS without interference of secondary reactions.
For the identification and quantification, the shock tube is operated in single-pulse mode. The shock tube is coupled to a heated (363 K) gas sampling system that automatically transfers gas samples to a GC/MS (Agilent 7890A and MSD 5975C) after each experiment. The gas chromatograph (GC) was equipped with a PLOT-Q column for the separation of nonpolar and polar compounds up to C12 and a HP5 column for the separation of larger species. Both columns are connected to a quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS). Kr was used as internal standard. Further details are given in Ref.
To simultaneously measure multiple species with a time resolution of 10 米s, the shock tube is operated in conventional mode and coupled to a high-repetition-rate time-of-flight mass spectrometer (HRR-TOF-MS, Kaesdorf). Details are reported in Ref. [11,15], therefore only a brief description is given here. The HRR-TOF-MS is connected by an ISO flange to the end plate of driven section of the shock tube. The end plate contains a nozzle with a diameter of 60 米m protruding 1 mm into the shock tube. An electron-impact ion source with an energy of 45 eV was used for the ionization and the acceleration of the ionizing electrons. The TOF-MS is operated in reflection mode and the ions are detected with a two stage micro-channel plate detector (MCP). The repetition rate was set to 100 kHz, which provides full mass spectra with masses up to 175 u in intervals of 10 米s. The data was recorded by a 8 bit A/D card (Agilent acqiris, DP214) with a sampling rate of 2 GS/s. In all HRRTOF-MS measurements, Ne was used as bath gas because of its low electron-impact ionization cross section and the integrated mass filter was used to further suppress the Ne signal to prevent detector overload. To maximize the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), the MCP voltage was adjusted to maximize the reactant peak intensity within the linear range of the instrument while partially saturating the Ne peak. The raw data were converted into intensity每 time profiles by summation of the peak area over a certain time profile by a Matlab routine. 
The reaction mechanism was adopted from Chu et al. and updated in this work. It includes possible initial dissociation processes of TMOS and molecular elimination reactions as well as bond fissions. The mechanism is divided into two sub-mechanisms: The silicon/silicon-oxide sub-mechanism was taken from Chu et al. and was complemented with the results of this study; and the sub-mechanism describing the CH3OH chemistry was taken from Burke et al. Thermodynamic data of most Si-containing species were calculated by Ho and Meliu. However, for five species, n thermodynamic data were available (CH2OSi (OCH3)2, C2H5OSiO (OCH3), HSi(OCH3)3, CH2OSi (OCH3)3,and CH2OSi (OCH3)2) and thus obtained here from quantum chemical calculations at the G4 level of theory using the GAUSSIAN 09 package. The respective data is shown in the supplemental material.
Based on molecular structures, frequencies and moments of inertia obtained from the quantum chemical calculations, thermodynamic data Cp(T), Hf (T) and S(T) were derived by using the GPOP program. Cp, H, and S are also functions of the temperature and TMOS is considered as a perfect gas. At 1每2 bar and diluted conditions real gas effects are not expected. The vibrational frequencies calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G(2df,p) level of theory during the G4 procedure were scaled by 0.99 for the zero-point energy calculation and by 0.97 for the vibrational partition-function calculations. B3LYP functionals are known to underestimate imaginary frequencies in transition-state theory calculations, but apart from this problem, they usually yield very reasonable frequency values and we expect that this also applies for silicon-organic compounds. To support this assumption, we compared simulated IR spectra of TMOS and experimental frequencies (Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). The measured data were obtained by IR absorption measurements of thin amorphous films of condensed TMOS reported by Ignatyev et al. At wavenumbers below 1000 cm每1, the B3LYP calculation is able to reproduce experimental frequencies within deviations of less than 20 cm每1. Between 1000 and 1600 cm每1, the calculated frequencies deviate from the measured values by not more than 40 cm每1. Therefore, we assume that even for larger silicon-organic compounds like TMOS, the groups attached to oxygen atoms were treated as hindered rotations using the Pitzer-Gwinn approximation as implemented in GPOP. Rotational barrier heights for CH3 rotors were obtained from relaxed potential energy surface (PES) scans at the B3LYP/6-31G(2df,p) level of theory with dihedral angles used as coordinates for the scans. CH3 groups represent symmetric rotors, an asymmetric rotor. Since the Pitzer-Gwinn approximation for the hindered rotor partition function, qPG, depends on the rotational barrier height, V0, the partition function of the C2H5 rotor needs to be evaluated to derive suitable values for V0. For this purpose, the potential of the C2H5 rotor was fitted to a regression function. Here, 汐 represents the dihedral angle, a1每a12 are the fitting parameters, and c1每c6 are constants (Figure S1 (a)). With the program BEx1D, which is a Schr?dinger-equation eigen-problem solver for an intramolecular onedimensional hindered rotation, the exact values, qHR, for the hindered rotor partition function can be obtained based on the fitting function V(汐). The Pitzer-Gwinn approximation qPG is evaluated for the lowest vibrational mode corresponding to an internal rotation. The value of V0 is adjusted until qPG is within less than	5% of qHR (Figure S2 (b)). To limit the computational effort, the PG approximation is preferred over the exact partition function, which is only needed in special cases when strongly asymmetric rotor potentials are involved.
C2H5OSiO(OCH3) can also decompose by eliminations. There are two possible elimination channels: C2H5OSiO(OCH3) CH4 CH3CHO SiO2 R14) which represents a six-center elimination, and C2H5OSiO(OCH3) C2H4 OHSiO(OCH3) R15), which is a four-center elimination. Only by adjusting the rate constants k14 and k15 it was possible to correctly reproduce CH4 and C2H4 concentration profiles. Future quantum-chemical calculations should validate the possibility of CH4 elimination and the choice of rate constants for k14 and k15. Furthermore, the simulation of the experimental data of Chu et al. with our mechanism considering the initial TMOS decomposition steps in the fall-off range is in good agreement for CH4, CO, and TMOS except for CH2O at 915 and 953 K.
RESULT and DISCUSSION
In this study, we measured the rate constants k[TMOS products] of the decomposition of TMOS behind reflected shock waves in a singlepulse shock tube with GC/MS, and with HRRTOF-MS. The experiments were carried out at 1131每1610 K and 1.9每2.3 bar and concentrations between 330 and 5000 ppm TMOS in Ar or Ne (Table 1).
The pyrolysis of TMOS is endothermic and the heat consumption rises with increasing temperature. All measurements were modeled with Chemical Workbench based on non-reactive pressure profiles of pure Ar or Ne which account temperature variations during the reaction and cooling phases gure 1 shows the consumption of TMOS and the product distribution during the thermal decomposition of TMOS for varying temperatures and initial concentrations. The decomposition of TMOS starts noticeably around 1200 K and at 1400 K TMOS is completely consumed. The main products during the decomposition were CH3OH, CH4, C2H4, and C2H6. Acetylene (C2H2) was found in much smaller concentrations while no silicon-containing products were detected. The primary stable product CH3OH is formed via Si(OCH3)4 H3OH CH2OSi(OCH3)2 (R2). ocal sensitivity analysis for CH3OH demonstrates that R2 has the largest impact on the measured CH3OH concentration and at T > 1400 K, reaction CH3OH + H CH2OH + H2 strongly influences the CH3OH concentration (Fig. 2). This is the main reaction consuming CH3OH that was missing in the mechanism of Chu et al. 
Besides the elimination of CH3OH, TMOS can also decompose by the dissociation R1. This is only a minor channel and at 1000 K the branching ratio BRR1 k1/(k1 k2) of Chu et al. suggests that only 1.3% decomposes by R1. The impact of R1 rises with increasing temperature and for instance at 1525 K 30% of TMOS were decomposed by reaction R1 postulated by Chu et al.(Fig. 3).
Figure 1 shows that the formation of CH4, C2H4, and C2H6 starts at 1300 K. The CH4 concentration reaches its maximum at 1400 K. In comparison to CH4, C2H4, and C2H6 are formed in much smaller concentrations. CH3 is formed mainly by the bond fission R1 and slightly contributes to CH4 formation by bimolecular reactions with TMOS and TMOS decomposition products. Chu et al. identified carbon monoxide (CO) by FTIR as another reaction product during the decomposition. We also found CO, but due to its low sensitivity with the GC/MS it was not possible to quantify the CO concentration. The use of C6H5每CH3 as chemical inhibitor shifts the decomposition to significantly higher temperatures because C6H5每CH3 suppresses bimolecular reactions between TMOS and radicals. In addition, C6H5每CH3 inhibits the molecular elimination reaction to CH3OH probably because C6H5每CH3 reacts with the dipolar intermediate OC?H2每(OCH3)Si每O+H每CH3 postulated by Chu
et al. to TMOS and benzyl so that the molecular rearrangement of the intermediate to methanol and CH2OSi(OCH3)2 does not occur. In the presence of C6H5每CH3, almost no CH3OH was formed and only CH4 was measured. The formation of CH4 indicates that TMOS decomposes mainly by an O每C bond scission and is in accordance with the calculated energy barriers of C每O and Si-O bonds with 410 kJ/mol and 548 kJ/mol, respectively [9]. Figure 1 also shows the simulation of the measured TMOS and its products with the proposed mechanism (Table 2). The decomposition of TMOS for initial concentrations of 300每1200 ppm as well as the formation of products simulated based on the mechanism of this work agree with the experimental data. The carbon yield represents the amount of C atoms of formed products divided by the amount of C atoms of the decomposed TMOS and was calculated for different initial concentrations of TMOS (Figure S4). At the lowest extents of reaction, only 25% of the consumed carbon was measured. With increased temperature, more products are formed and the carbon yield increases up to 50%. We attribute this carbon-yield deficit to carbon bonded to undetectable intermediate silicon species after the initial decomposition step. Another factor that lowers the carbon yield, is the missing CO and CH2O in the carbon balance.
Figure 4 compares HRR-TOF-MS mass spectra for pre-shock conditions (T1 295 K, p1 42.5 mbar, averaged for 0.5 ms) and for post-reflected-shock conditions (T5 1516 K, p5 1.41 bar, averaged fo 1.5 ms). TMOS shows a base peak at m/z 121 and the parent peak at m/z 152 and many smaller fragment peaks spread over the complete spectrum For thee valuation of the concentration每time profiles of TMOS we used the base peak at m/z 121 that corresponds to Si(OCH3)3+. The peaks at m/z 40 and 80每86 are related to the internal standards Ar and Kr, respectively. The peak at m/z 28 is the base peak of CO and overlaps with a smaller fragment peak of TMOS and the base peak of C2H4, nevertheless it is possible to separate the signals of TMOS, C2H4 and CO at m/z 28, though every separation step deteriorate the SNR. For the evaluation of C2H4, the fragment signal at m/z 27 (C2H3+) was used. It is speculative but it is possible that the peak at m/z 30 is the parent peak of CH2O, the base peak at m/z 29 overlaps with a fragment peak of TMOS. The GC/MS measurements show that CH3OH is formed during the decomposition of TMOS, therefore the signal at m/z 32 is attributed to the parent peak of CH3OH and the base peak of CH3OH at m/z = 31 overlaps with fragment peak of TMOS. It was not possible to quantify CH3OH and CH2O concentrations because their signal intensities were too weak. However, the appearance of the peaks at m/z 30 and 32 shows qualitatively the formation of these products and reflects the decomposition of TMOS. With the HRR-TOF-MS, no silicon-containing product species were detected.
Figure 5 shows measured and calculated concentration每time profiles for TMOS, and CO for T5 1533 K, p5 1.35 bar for 0.5% TMOS in Ne. The simulation accurately predicts [TMOS]t and underpredicts [CO]t by 30%. The scatter of the CO data is caused by the evaluation using separation of three overlapping peaks at m/z 28. It was not possible to evaluate the base peak of C2H4 at m/z 28 because this peak overlaps with the base peak of CO and a fragment peak of TMOS. The SNR of the smaller fragment peak at m/z 27 was too low to quantify the C2H4 concentration.
Figure 6 contains the data of the simulated values for the TMOS decomposition using the mechanism discussed in Table 2 based on the TMOS consumption measured with GC/MS and HRR-TOF-MS. The Arrhenius expression koverall[TMOS products] 2.9 1011exp( 225 kJ mol?1/RT)s?1 was obtained by ascertaining the disappearance of TMOS to the sum of the dissociation channels (R1, R2). For the k1/k2 ratio, we used the temperature-dependent branching ratio BRR2 k2/(k1 k2) given by Chu et al. [9]. Figure 6 shows that the GC/MS data for temperatures between 1131 and 1438 K ties seamlessly to the HRR-TOFMS data for 1440每1610 K and the results of both techniques are consistent (Fig. 6), the uncertainty of the final rate expression is about 30%. The extrapolated rate coefficient of Chu et al. agrees well with our measurements at lower temperatures. At the higher temperatures of our study, the rate coefficients and the observed activation energy are lower due to fall-off effects at these conditions. The rate constant of the measurements with C5H6每CH3 compared to the measurements without inhibitor is roughly a factor of four slower and coincides with the rate constant of the dissociation of CH3 (R1). The result confirms the exclusive formation of CH4 when the chemical inhibitor was used.
CONCLUSION
The pyrolysis of TMOS was studied behind reflected shock waves at 1131每1610 K and 1.9 to 2.3 bar. The results indicate that TMOS decom- poses mainly via four-center isomerization with subsequent three-center cyclization and elimination forming CH3OH and (CH3O)SiOCH2. At higher temperatures, the C每O bond fission to CH3OSi(OCH3)3 gains importance. The main detected products are CH3OH, CH4, C2H4, and C2H6. Measurements with C6H5每CH3 as radical inhibitor reveal that the TMOS decomposition is influenced by secondary reactions. When C6H5每 CH3 was used, mainly CH4 and no CH3OH was formed. It is assumed that C6H5每CH3 interacts with a dipolar intermediate during the elimination of CH3OH and inhibits the formation towards CH3OH. A kinetics mechanism based on the mechanism of Chu et al. and the methanol mechanism from Burke et al. was developed. The silicon species sub-mechanism consists of 24 reactions containing 13 silicon species. The mechanism was updated with the rate coefficients of this study and additional reactions were included to account for the product concentrations. A good agreement was achieved with all detected species. This study substantially expanded the temperature range of previous TMOS pyrolysis studies and the mechanism can be applied for modelling high-temperature processes in gas-phase systems using TMOS as a precursor for the synthesis of SiO2.
