Heat pipe dryout and temperature hysteresis in response to transient heat pulses exceeding the capillary limit

Abstract:
The balance between the capillary pressure provided by the wick in a heat pipe or vapor chamber and the ﬂow resistance to liquid resupply at the evaporator determines the maximum heat load that can be sustained at steady state. This maximum heat load is termed as the capillary limit; operation at steady heat loads above the capillary limit will result in dryout at the evaporator wick. However, different user
needs and device workloads can lead to highly transient heat loads in applications ranging from con- sumer electronic devices to server processors. In these instances, the operation of heat pipes must be assessed in response to brief transient heat loads which could be higher than the notional capillary limit that governs dryout at steady state. In the current study, experiments are performed to characterize the
transient thermal response of a heat pipe subjected to heat input pulses of varying duration that ex- ceed the capillary limit. Transient dryout events due to a wick pressure drop exceeding the maximum available capillary pressure can be detected from an analysis of the measured temperature signatures. It is demonstrated that under such transient heating conditions, a heat pipe can sustain heat loads higher than the steady-state capillary limit for brief periods of time without experiencing dryout. If the heating
pulse is suﬃciently long as to induce transient dryout, the heat pipe may experience an elevated steady- state temperature even after the heat load is reduced back to a level lower than the capillary limit. The steady-state heat load must then be reduced to a level much below the capillary limit to fully recover the original thermal resistance of the heat pipe. This characteristic temperature hysteresis following tran- sient dryout has signiﬁcant implications for the use of heat pipes for pulsed power dissipation. Further experiments are performed to bound the range of heat loads over which the temperature hysteresis is present following a transient dryout event.

1.Introduction:
Heat pipes and vapor chambers utilize the latent heat of phase change of an internal working ﬂuid to passively transport heat over long distances at a small temperature gradient. Heat pipes ﬁnd use in thermal management of electronic devices in both low- and high-power applications owing to their eﬃcient heat transport [1–3].  
The hollow metal case of a heat pipe is lined on the inside by a porous wick that is saturated with liquid; the interior core of the heat pipe supports vapor ﬂow [4].  A local heat source is applied to the evaporator region of the heat pipe, and the surface dedicated for heat rejection to the ambient is called the condenser. Application of a heat input causes the liquid to evaporate at the wick and ﬂow through the vapor core. The vapor condenses on the wick that lines the condenser surface and is passively drawn back to the evaporator via capillary forces generated in the wick. An increase in the heat input increases the rate of evaporation from the wick, and induces a higher ﬂuid ﬂow rate and pressure drop in the heat pipe. The maximum heat load that a heat pipe can sustain at steady state while maintaining liquid resupply to the evaporator is governed by the capillary pressure of the wick. Any heat load inducing a ﬂuid pressure drop higher than the capillary pressure head will result in dryout at the evaporator wick; this threshold heat load is commonly known as the capillary limit. 
The capillary limit, which governs the maximum steady-state heat load, is primarily dependent on the heat pipe geometry, working ﬂuid properties, and wick properties. Working ﬂuids are typically chosen based on thermophysical liquid properties that would yield the maximum capillary limit [5,6].  Recent studies have explored the use of ﬂuid additives [7,8] to increase the maximum 
heat transport rate in heat pipes. A number of studies have inves- tigated the capillary limit-induced dryout phenomenon in porous wick structures in heat pipes. Hanlon and Ma [9] characterized the dependence of dryout heat ﬂux in sintered particle structures on wick thickness, particle size, and porosity. Chun [10] studied the dryout of screen wicks pumping vertically against gravity, and developed a model to predict the dryout heat load as a function of the wicking length. For screen mesh wicks, Brautsch and Kew [11] showed that the heat ﬂux required for dryout increases with an increasing number of mesh layers. A model for steady-state temperature and pressure drop in a ﬂat heat pipe developed by Lefevere and Lallemand [12] was used to show that the maximum heat ﬂux of a grooved heat pipe increases with an increase in the groove width [13]. 
Rather than considering the individual effects of the working ﬂuid and wick on performance, several studies have characterized the coupling between the capillary behavior and different gov- 
erning parameters of vapor chambers and heat pipes. Rice and Faghri [14] numerically simulated the temperature and pressure ﬁelds in sintered wick heat pipes, accounting for changes in menis- cus shape due to evaporation as a function of applied heat load and location of the heat source. The parametric dependence of heat 
pipe performance on wick properties (thickness, radius of curva- ture, porosity) and heater diameter was investigated by Pruzan et  al. [15];  the physical insights from the study were used to de- 
sign wicks capable of dissipating high heat loads. Other physical mechanisms, such as the effect of viscous drag along the wick substrate on liquid ﬂow in a wick [16] and heat spreading in the 
wall/wick from localized heat sources [17] can also have a promi- nent effect on the capillary limit of a heat pipe. Fluid loading in the wick also affects the capillary limit. Kempers et al. [18] showed that capillary limit was unaffected by over-ﬁlling the wick, but greatly diminished due to under-ﬁlling. In another study, Lips et al. [19] showed that a thinner vapor core improves the thermal resistance but reduces the capillary limit for an over-ﬁlled wick, and hence the vapor core thickness and ﬁlling ratio need to be carefully optimized. In our recent work [20],  we concluded that 
the choice of wick and working ﬂuid should Lips et al. [19] showed that a thinner vapor core improves the thermal resistance but reduces the capillary limit for an over-ﬁlled wick, and hence the vapor core thickness and ﬁlling ratio need to be carefully optimized. In our recent work [20],  we concluded that 
the choice of wick and working ﬂuid should be made simulta- neously to obtain the optimal thermal performance while utiliz- ing the maximum capillary pressure available, as the total thermal 
resistance is coupled to both the wick and working ﬂuid proper- ties. 
understand dryout mechanisms at steady-state operating condi- tions. However, electronic devices are rarely operated in a steady manner in practice, but rather, the operation is highly transient. For instance, in smartphones, the typical user behavior consisting of short periods of device interaction is well recognized in the literature [21] and is often referred to as ‘bursty’ or micro-usage [22,23].  These micro-usage device interaction patterns are also common in other applications, such as user activity on the internet [24] or while streaming media content [25].  For both low- and high-power applications, thermal design and thermally-limited performance throttling is increasingly dictated by such transient use-cases, often including short power spikes [26,27].  Hence, it is important to study the dryout behavior of heat pipes in response to a brief power pulse that exceeds the conventional capillary limit value at steady state.
A number of studies have investigated the thermal and hydro- dynamic response of vapor chambers and heat pipes under tran- sient operating conditions. A seminal example by Tournier and El-Genk [28] is a two-dimensional transient model of a heat pipe that predicted the effective radii of curvature of the liquid menisci 
along the liquid-vapor interface, in response to step-function heat- ing and cooling. Wang and Vafai [29] experimentally investigated the thermal performance of a ﬂat-plate heat pipe and proposed a heat pipe time constant. A model was developed [30] which indicated that the thermal penetration time is dependent on the effective thermal diffusivity along the heat pipe; the time to steady state is strongly dependent on the heat transfer coeﬃcient to the ambient. Several studies have also benchmarked the transient performance of ﬂat heat pipes against solid metal heat spreaders. Harmand et al. [31] compared vapor chambers against solid heat spreaders in terms of total thermal resistance using a transient numerical model, and found solid heat spreaders to have lower temperature gradients than vapor chambers for short transient thermal cycles. Recently, Patankar et al. [32] investigated the physical mechanisms governing vapor chamber performance under transient operating conditions, using an experimentally validated time-stepping analytical model [33].  The maximum temperature in a solid heat spreader was found to be lower than the vapor chamber for short periods of time just after start-up owing to the low relative thermal capacity of the vapor chamber. At later times, the vapor chamber performed better than the solid spreader as the operating temperature and effective vapor core conductance increased. Other factors such as wick ﬁlling ratio, gravity, heat ﬂux, and convective cooling can also affect the transient performance 
of a heat pipe [34].  However, these prior studies have only charac- terized the transient operating characteristics; to the knowledge of the authors, none have focused on the transient thermal behavior up to the point of dryout or above the steady-state capillary limit. 
In this paper, we experimentally demonstrate that a heat pipe can brieﬂy operate, without the occurrence of dryout, at heat loads higher than the value corresponding to the steady-state capillary limit. Furthermore, the response of the heat pipe to a pulsed heat load above this notional capillary limit is characterized to assess the thermal signatures of the dryout phenomenon under such transient conditions. A threshold time-to-dryout corresponding to the applied heating pulse power is identiﬁed; pulse durations exceeding time-to-dryout are shown to cause dryout. Hysteresis in the heat pipe temperature is observed following dryout. That is, if dryout occurs, the heat load must be reduced to a level signiﬁcantly lower than the capillary limit in order to fully recover the original performance. 

2. Experimental setup：
A schematic diagram of the experimental facility used to characterize the heat pipe transient thermal behavior is shown in 
Fig. 1.  The setup was designed to isolate the heat pipe from exter- nal components or materials (such as insulation) that would add thermal capacity and affect the transient thermal response in an experiment. The heat pipe sample used in this study was 150 mm long, 9 mm wide, and 0.62 mm thick (Novark Technologies). The two ends of the heat pipe have a solid copper cross section, such that the effective length of the heat pipe having a vapor 
core is 120 mm. The heat pipe was suspended in air by hang- 
ing from long, thin steel wires to minimize heat losses through this pathway. The left end of the heat pipe was covered with a layer of polyimide tape over a length of 8 mm, and a sheathed Nichrome wire wrapped on top to form a heater. Thermal grease (OMEGATHERM 201) was applied between the heater wire and polyimide surface. Power input to the heater was controlled using a programmable power supply (Korad KA3005P) to induce Joule heating. The supply current was calculated by measuring the voltage drop across a shunt resistor (0.01 􀀁); the voltage drop across the Nichrome wires was measured directly. 
Temperatures were measured along the length of the heat pipe using T-type thermocouples at the locations shown in Fig. 1.  The thermocouple beads labeled B were attached to the outer surface of the heat pipe using small pieces of copper tape. To measure 
the temperature at the evaporator, thermocouple A1 was sand- 
wiched between the polyimide tape and heat pipe surface. The thermocouples were all calibrated in a dry block calibrator (Jupiter Isotech 4852) using the same procedure that was previously demonstrated to yield an uncertainty of ±0.3 K [35].  The reference temperature for the thermocouples during the calibration and the experiment was maintained near 0° C using an ice-point reference (OMEGA CL122). The temperatures of the ice-point junction and the ambient were measured using RTDs. The temperature measurements were acquired using a data ac- quisition chassis (National Instruments (NI) cDAQ–9178) equipped 
with thermocouple (NI–9214) and RTD (NI–9217) modules. Volt- ages were measured using a separate data acquisition unit (NI USB–6255). Data were recorded using a LabVIEW interface at 4 Hz. 
Heat dissipation to the ambient was facilitated by placement of two fans that blow ambient air over the heat pipe, with the air ﬂow direction as indicated in Fig. 1.  The heat transfer coeﬃcient via forced convection cooling was estimated by performing an analogous experiment with a solid copper ﬁn of length 150 mm, width 8.6 mm, and thickness 2.4 mm, and ﬁtting the measured temperature readings to an analytical solution. The heat transfer coeﬃcient was found to be in the range of 85–110 W/m 2 -K for input powers from 1 W to 7 W. This analog experiment also enabled estimation of the net heat input to the ﬁn, which was found to be in agreement with the measured electrical heat input, showing that the heat loss from the heater was small. Speciﬁcally, the difference between electrical input and measured heat load dissipated from the ﬁn was ~9% at lower powers (1 W to 2 W), and ~5% at higher powers. Heat losses are therefore neglected during testing of the heat pipe. 

3. Results and discussion：
The following subsections discuss a series of experiments that were performed to identify the response of a heat pipe subjected 
to transient heat loads exceeding the capillary limit. Each subsec- 
tion brieﬂy presents the experimental test procedure, followed by a detailed discussion of the results. 
Prior to investigating the transient thermal response of the heat pipe sample, the steady-state thermal performance is benchmarked and compared to that of a solid copper ﬁn 
(150 mm × 8.6 mm × 1.6 mm) under identical boundary con- ditions. A given heat load is applied to the sample (heat pipe or copper ﬁn), and the system is allowed to reach steady state. Steady state is deﬁned as when the standard deviation in the time-averaged temperature of all thermocouple measurements over 37.5 s is less than ~0.05° C. Fig. 2 shows a comparison of steady-state temperature proﬁles along the length of the heat pipe and copper ﬁn for two different power levels (2 W and 5 W).The heat source extends from 0 to 8 mm, as indicated by the shaded region in the ﬁgure. The temperatures are obtained from point A1 within the heated region and from B1 to B6 along the exposed length. At both power levels, the maximum temperature in the heated region (A1) is lower for the heat pipe as compared to the copper ﬁn, and the temperature proﬁle (B1-B6) is more uniform. This temperature uniformity over the heat pipe surface is a result of effective heat transport through the vapor core at a small temperature gradient [36].  
The steady-state capillary limit is found by measuring the temperatures along the heat pipe at increasing heat loads from 1 W to 5.2 W. The heat load is increased in small increments, and the heat pipe is allowed to reach a steady state at each heat input. When the heat load is increased from 5.1 W to 5.2 W, a sharp increase in the evaporator temperature and a momentary decrease in condenser temperature is observed, indicating that a dryout has occurred. Hence, 5.1 W is identiﬁed as the maximum heat load that can be supplied at steady state to the heat pipe sample under the test boundary conditions without the occurrence of dryout (i.e., it is the steady-state capillary limit of the heat pipe). 

3.1. Transient dryout in response to a power pulse exceeding the steady-state capillary limit ：
The thermal response of the heat pipe to a power pulse input is shown in Fig. 3.  The heat pipe is initially operated at a steady- state power of 3 W, as shown in the temporal heat load proﬁle of Fig. 3 (a). At t = 0 s, the power input to the heat pipe is suddenly increased to 10 W, which is higher than the measured steady-state capillary limit (5.1 W). The power input is maintained at 10 W for approximately 10 s, after which it is reduced to 3 W. 
Fig. 3 (b) shows the corresponding temporal variation in the evaporator temperature at location A1 in response to this transient power pulse. The temperature is initially steady at 48.5° C when the power input is 3 W. At t = 0 s, the evaporator experiences a sharp temperature rise due to the increase in power input to 10 W. The evaporator temperature increases monotonically throughout the 10 s long pulse, during which an inﬂection is observed at t = 5.25 s. Appearance of this inﬂection in the temperature at the evaporator indicates that a dryout event has occurred due to insuﬃcient liquid supply by capillary action. A more distinct temperature signature is observed in Fig. 3 (c), which shows the variation of the condenser temperature with time. At the start of the power pulse (t  = 0 s), the condenser temperature increases 
monotonically until t = 5.25 s. At this point in time, the temper- 
ature proﬁle begins to ﬂatten out and a plateau is observed. The temperature dips momentarily, and then starts to increase again. This occurrence of a plateau in the temperature response at the condenser also indicates the occurrence of dryout. Dryout at the evaporator is immediately reﬂected in the condenser temperature response because of the very short time scales associated with diffusion in the vapor core. 
The occurrence of an inﬂection point in the evaporator tem- perature at the point of dryout, along with the plateau in the condenser proﬁle, is attributed to a transition in the primary heat transfer pathway before and after dryout, as discussed further in Ref. [37].  Heat transfer before dryout is primarily due to phase change at the evaporator, while heat conduction in the wall is the primary heat transfer pathway after dryout. The time at which dryout occurs, termed here as the time-to-dryout, is 5.25 s from the time the power input is increased. 
At the end of the power pulse, the power input is dropped back to 3 W and the heat pipe is allowed to reach steady state. The new steady-state evaporator temperature attained by the heat pipe after the power pulse has ended is a further indication that dryout has occurred during the pulse. It is observed from Fig. 3 (b) that the steady-state evaporator temperature after the power pulse (t  > ~80 s) is ~12° C higher than the initial temperature at the same steady power input of 3 W before the pulse input (t  < 0 s). We attribute the presence of this temperature hysteresis to the characteristic hysteresis in the rewetting process of the wick after a dry patch has formed [38–40].  Thus, we infer that the temperature hysteresis observed before and after the power pulse ( Fig. 3 (b)) is due to the occurrence of transient dryout of the heat pipe at t = 5.25 s. 

3.2. Temperature hysteresis after the occurrence of transient dryout ：
Hysteresis in the evaporator temperature after a power pulse indicates that a transient dryout event has occurred in the heat pipe. The dryout occurs due to wick pressure drop exceeding the 
available capillary pressure during the power pulse at the time-to- dryout. In this section, the duration of the power pulse is varied to determine its effect on the hysteresis behavior. Fig. 4 shows the thermal response of a heat pipe operated under heating pulse durations of 4 s, 10 s, 14 s, and 16 s. The heat pipe is initialized at a power of 3 W (t  < 0), pulsed above the capillary limit to 7 W for the different durations, and reduced back to 3 W, as shown in the load proﬁles in Fig. 4 (a). The evaporator temperature proﬁles corresponding to each of these four different pulse durations is plotted in Fig. 4 (b). 
For the shortest 7 W pulse duration of 4 s, no inﬂection is observed in the evaporator temperature during the power pulse (blue curve; Fig. 4 (b)). Moreover, the evaporator temperature does not exhibit any observable temperature hysteresis after the pulsed loading ends; the steady-state evaporator temperature measured after the pulse ends and the heat input reverts to 3 W (t  > ~40 s) is the same as it was before the pulse (t  < 0). The absence of an inﬂection in the evaporator temperature during the pulse or of any temperature hysteresis indicates that the heat pipe did not undergo dryout. 
It is noted that the heat pipe operated without the occurrence of dryout or any hysteresis for a brief period of time at a heat load (7 W) that is higher than the notional steady-state capillary limit (5.1 W). The ability of the heat pipe to operate above the capillary limit without experiencing dryout results from the lag 
between the thermal/hydrodynamic response and the heat in- crease. Based on the mechanisms governing transient performance of a heat pipe [32],  the effective in-plane diffusivity governs the time required for the temperature proﬁle to develop at the start of the transient load. A higher in-plane diffusivity would lead to a quicker thermal and hydrodynamic proﬁle development, and thus, a shorter time-to-dryout in response to a pulse load input. time-to-dryout, the heat pipe undergoes dryout and exhibits tem- perature hysteresis at the evaporator upon a return to the lower steady-state heat input. From Fig. 4 (b), it is observed that the hysteresis in the evaporator temperature increases in magnitude with an increase in pulse duration longer than the time-to-dryout. The difference in temperature at the 3 W input before and after the power pulse is 4° C for a pulse duration of 10 s, and increases  to 10° C for a pulse duration of 14 s. However, as the pulse duration further increases, the temperature hysteresis asymptotes towards a maximum value. With an increase in pulse duration from 14 s and 16 s, the magnitude of temperature hysteresis remains at ~10° C, and does not increase any further with longer pulses. 
For a heating pulse from a 3 W base to 7 W, evaporator temperature hysteresis was found to occur after transient dryout. However, the occurrence of a transient dryout is not necessarily accompanied by hysteresis after the power pulse ends; instead the occurrence of hysteresis depends on the characteristics of the power pulse. For example, the cases in Fig. 5 (a) explore a different power pulse proﬁle initialized at a lower steady-state power input of 2 W (t  < 0), and pulsed to the same increased load of 7 W for durations of 14 s, 16 s, 18 s, and 20 s. All of these pulse durations 
are longer than the time-to-dryout, as Fig. 5 (b) reveals an inﬂec- tion in the evaporator temperature response at t = 9.75 s, the time at which dryout occurs for all cases. Interestingly, with the lower baseline (steady-state) power of 2 W, the evaporator recovers to 
the same temperature after the pulse, without any observable hys- teresis in temperature, even though the pulse duration exceeded the time-to-dryout and transient dryout occurred. The presence of temperature hysteresis at the baseline load of 3 W, and its absence at 2 W, suggests that the steady-state operating power governs the 
recovery of the heat pipe after the dryout. Therefore, the next sec- tion investigates the temperature hysteresis under steady state op- eration, to probe whether the steady state performance character- istics can be used to explain the recovery after a transient dryout. 

3.3. Post-dryout temperature hysteresis envelope under steady operation ：
To investigate the steady-state temperature hysteresis behavior of a heat pipe after dryout at the capillary limit, the heat pipe sample is ﬁrst subjected to increasing steady power inputs until dryout occurs. During this powering-up procedure, the heat load is incremented by small, ﬁnite amounts; the increment is 0.5 W at low heat loads (1 W to 4 W) and is reduced to 0.1 W as the heat load approaches the capillary limit of 5.1 W. At each input heat load, the heat pipe is allowed to reach a steady state. After reaching the capillary limit, the temperature is allowed to reach steady state in the dried-out condition, and the power is further 
increased to 5.4 W by a small amount to complete the powering- up procedure. From this dried-out condition above the capillary limit, the heat load to the heat pipe is then decreased from 5.4 W following a powering-down procedure during which the power is reduced in small decrements back to the initial condition, again allowing steady state to be reached at each power. Fig. 6 traces the variation of the steady-state evaporator temperature (location A1) with increasing and deceasing input heat load along these powering-up (black) and powering-down (gray) pathways. 
During the powering-up procedure, the evaporator temperature increases with an increase in heat load (1 W to 5.1 W) as expected. When the heat load is incremented from 5.1 W to 5.2 W, a sharp increase in evaporator temperature is observed. The steady-state evaporator temperature rises from 58° C at 5.1 W to 83° C at 5.2 W. This sharp rise is due to an increase in total thermal resistance of the heat pipe after the dryout, and indicates that the heat pipe has reached its capillary limit. The hysteresis in the steady-state evaporator temperature after dryout is clearly evident from Fig. 6.  During the powering-down trace from 5.4 W, the evaporator has a markedly higher temperature than measured at the same heat loads during the powering-up trace. This temperature discrepancy (i.e., severity of the temperature hysteresis) gradually reduces as the heat load is decreased, until there is ultimately no observable temperature difference at a power of 2 W. 

3.4. Discussion ：
In Section 3.2,  we demonstrated that there is signiﬁcant tem- perature hysteresis before and after a transient dryout event when the heat pipe is pulsed from 3 W to a heat load of 7 W (exceeding the capillary limit of 5.1 W), and then returned to 3 W. However, when pulsing to the same 7 W pulse but initialized from a lower 
baseline power of 2 W, there is no observable temperature hystere- sis after transient dryout. In Section 3.3,  the temperature hysteresis 
after dryout is characterized under steady-state operating condi- 
tions by decreasing the power after the heat pipe has reached its capillary limit. These experiments revealed that the temperature hysteresis is observed only for heat loads above 2 W. The absence of temperature hysteresis at 2 W –both in cases of dryout caused by a transient power pulse ( Fig. 5)  and when reached by steadily powering down from above the capillary limit – indicates that 
the envelope of temperature hysteresis under steady-state condi- tions ( Fig. 6)  may serve to bound the input power range in which 
hysteresis would be observed after the occurrence of dryout. In ad- 
dition, the severity of the temperature hysteresis at a given power appears to be bounded by the steady-state operation of the heat pipe after the capillary limit has been reached, as illustrated by the 
magnitude of temperature hysteresis at 3 W. In Fig. 6,  the mag- nitude of temperature difference between the powering-up and powering-down traces at 3 W is ~14° C. This temperature difference is comparable to the upper limit of temperature hysteresis (~10° C) observed after transient dryout when pulsing from 3 W to a heat load above the capillary limit and returning back to 3 W ( Fig. 4 ).  Based on these observations, we speculate that the temperature hysteresis range and severity (magnitude) in Fig. 6,  measured at steady-state by incrementally powering down the head load, is a  bounding envelope. Moreover, the maximum heat load for which no hysteresis is observed after steady-state dryout (~2 W for the present case) represents a critical threshold below which the heat pipe must be operated in order to recover its original performance, if an unintended transient dryout event were to occur. 

4. Conclusions：
In this study, we explored the transient response of a heat pipe to pulsed heat load inputs above the notional capillary limit. From the series of experiments, we conclude that: 
1 A heat pipe can operate for brief periods of time at heat loads higher than its capillary limit at steady state, without the occurrence of dryout. 
2 In response to a power pulse exceeding the steady-state cap- illary limit, we measured a time-to-dryout at which the heat pipe experiences dryout. 
3 Operation longer than the time-to-dryout for a power pulse higher than the capillary limit may lead to hysteresis in temperature at the evaporator (i.e., the temperature will not recover back to its original magnitude even after the power is reduced back to the pre-pulse level). 
4 The magnitude of temperature hysteresis observed by allowing a heat pipe to reach steady state after the capillary limit has been exceeded serves as the limiting (maximum) severity for the temperature hysteresis observed after transient dryout in response to a power pulse. 
5 A threshold heat load exists below which the heat pipe does not exhibit any temperature hysteresis after dryout; this may represent a critical power that the heat pipe must drop below in order to fully recover performance after a dryout event. 

