Co-designing electronics with microfluidics for more sustainable cooling

Abstract:
Thermal management is one of the main challenges for the future of electronics1–5. With the ever-increasing rate of data generation and communication, as well as the constant push to reduce the size and costs of industrial converter systems, the power density of electronics has risen6. Consequently, cooling, with its enormous energy and water consumption, has an increasingly large environmental impact7,8, and  new technologies are needed to extract the heat in a more sustainable way—that is, requiring less water and energy9. Embedding liquid cooling directly inside the chip is a promising approach for more efficient thermal management5,10,11. However, even in state-of-the-art approaches, the electronics and cooling are treated separately, leaving the full energy-saving potential of embedded cooling untapped. Here we show that by co-designing microfluidics and electronics within the same semiconductor substrate we can produce a monolithically integrated manifold microchannel cooling structure with efficiency 
beyond what is currently available. Our results show that heat fluxes exceeding 1.7 kilowatts per square centimetre can be extracted using only 0.57 watts per square centimetre of pumping power. We observed an unprecedented coefficient of performance (exceeding 10,000) for single-phase water-cooling of heat fluxes exceeding 1 kilowatt per square centimetre, corresponding to a 50-fold increase compared to straight microchannels, as well as a very high average Nusselt number  of 16. The proposed cooling technology should enable further miniaturization of electronics, potentially extending Moore’s law and greatly reducing the energy consumption in cooling of electronics. Furthermore, by removing the need for large external heat sinks, this approach should enable the realization of very compact power converters integrated on a single chip.

1.Introduction:
In the USA alone, data centres consume 24 TWh of electricity and 100 billion litres of water to satisfy their cooling demands8, correspond-ing to the residential needs of a city of the size of Philadelphia12–14. The environmental impact of this information technology infrastructure is expected to increase dramatically9, for example, accounting for up to 31% of Ireland’s electricity demand by 2027 (ref. 15), in large part due to the power consumption of cooling systems. This development is accompanied by the constant push to shrink the size of semiconductor devices, which results in higher heat fluxes that become increasingly challenging to extract and require new cooling solutions. A similar need is observed in power electronics, as the electrification of our society demands more powerful, more efficient and smaller energy conver-sion systems. Wide-bandgap semiconductors, such as gallium nitride (GaN), are promising candidates for this purpose16. These materials enable much smaller dies than those of traditional semiconductors as well as the monolithic integration of power devices, supporting the miniaturization of complete power converters into a single chip17. However, to unlock the full potential of GaN, strategies for sustainable cooling of high-heat-flux applications are required.
Substantial research efforts have focused on improving the thermal path between the hotspot and the coolant. However, heat extraction capability is fundamentally limited by the thermal resistance between the semiconductor die and packaging. Furthermore, relying on large heat sinks reduces the power density and hinders integration, since devices cannot be densely packed. Bringing the coolant in direct contact with the device may be a way to overcome this limiting factor, for exam-ple, by impinging coolant on a bare die18 or by etching micrometre-sized channels directly inside the device to turn the substrate into a heat sink. The latter technique demonstrated state-of-the-art cooling per-formance due to the highly efficient heat transfer at the microscale19–21. The high pressure drop and large temperature gradients associated with these straight, parallel microchannels (SPMCs) were overcome by splitting the flow into multiple parallel sections, and distributing the coolant over these channels using manifolds22Early investigations23–26 and systematic numerical studies27–30 of manifold microchannel (MMC) heat sinks showed a large reduction in pumping power requirements and thermal resistance compared to SPMCs. Excellent heat extraction has been demonstrated with copper MMCs31, compact micro-fabricated multilayer silicon structures32–35 and by using additive manufactur-ing36,37. However, in all these approaches, the heat sink and electronic structure and fabrication process are considered separately, either by integrating a simple resistive heater functioning as the heat source, or by bonding the MMC structure to a commercial device38. This leaves the large potential of MMCs untapped. Improving the thermal coupling between the heat source and cooling has been investigated for hotspot mitigation39–41, but has remained unexplored in a complete device structure. Furthermore, despite much MMC heat sink research, the increasing complexity and associated reliability concerns caused by  the multiple bonded layers required for coolant delivery have pre-vented the adoption of MMCs in commercial devices.
In this work, we address these concerns by combining cooling and device design, using an approach in which a MMC heat sink is designed and fabricated in conjunction with the electronics. We present a mono-lithically integrated manifold microchannel (mMMC) heat sink in a single-crystalline silicon substrate with an epilayer, produced without the need for cumbersome bonding steps. Here the device design and heat-sink fabrication are combined within the same process, with bur-ied cooling channels embedded directly below the active area of the chip. Coolant thus impinging directly on the heat sources provides local and efficient heat extraction (Fig. 1a). On the back of this same substrate, manifold channels spread the liquid over the die (Fig. 1c) to obtain high temperature uniformity and low pressure drop, lead-ing to a very low pumping-power consumption and vastly improved cooling performance. Since the electronics and microfluidics are fully coupled and aligned (Fig. 1b), we call this approach microflu-idic–electronic co-design. We demonstrated microfluidic–electronic co-design on GaN-on-Si, a low-cost platform that is promising for real-izing high-power converters on a chip, comprising a GaN epilayer a few micrometres thick on a low-cost silicon substrate. The passive silicon substrate typically lacks functionality, but by turning it into an active cooling layer, it has the potential to extract extreme heat fluxes,  without requiring the added cost of high-thermal-conductivity  substrates. Our results show that considering cooling as an integral part of device design can result in orders-of-magnitude improvements in cooling performance. We use this embedded-cooling approach  to demonstrate a super-compact GaN-on-silicon integrated  alternating–direct current (a.c.–d.c.) converter, containing four  power devices on the same microfluidic-cooled chip, and yielding a power density of 25 kW dm−3. A simple multi-layered printed cir-cuit board (PCB) was designed to direct the coolant flow into the  semiconductor device

2.Co-design concept and fabrication:
Our co-design approach, in which each heat source is coupled to an individual buried cooling-channel serving as a local heat sink, is particularly of interest in GaN power electronic applications with a lateral high-electron-mobility transistor (HEMT) structure. Typi-cal source–drain spacing for HEMTs in >1-kV applications matches  the optimum dimensions for microchannel cooling of about 20 µm (refs. 19,42–44). Therefore, we investigated a GaN-on-Si device structure in which liquid impinges directly onto the epilayer below each contact, ensuring minimum thermal resistance between the hotspot and cool-ant. In this structure (Fig. 1a), the GaN epilayer provides the power electronics (Fig. 1b), and the silicon functions as a microchannel cooling and fluid-distribution network in a three-dimensional arrangement(Fig. 1c). Figure 1d illustrates the corresponding fabrication method.  A staggered pattern of slits was formed in the Si by anisotropic deep etching through narrow incisions in the AlGaN/GaN epilayer to achieve the desired microchannel depth. This pattern provided better struc-tural integrity of the epilayer during fabrication compared to con-tinuous slits. During the subsequent isotropic gas-etch, the channels widened and coalesced in the silicon substrate, while being monitored through the transparent GaN epilayer using an in situ optical etch-rate tracking. This two-step etching process provides independent control over channel width and depth, making it suitable to a wide range of contact pitches. The incisions were finally hermetically sealed during the device metallization step. The Methods and Extended Data Fig. 1 explain the fabrication procedure in detail. Figure 1e shows a scan-ning electron microscope (SEM) image of the device after the metal-lization step with sealed channels. Because of the narrow incisions in the epilayer, the contacts do not require substantial oversizing. The microchannels are in direct contact with the active area of the chip, thus providing excellent thermal coupling between the hotspot and the cooling channel (Fig. 1f). Through micrometre-sized openings in the epilayer, 125-µm-deep and 20-µm-wide channels were created in the silicon substrate (Fig. 1g, h).
A series of devices was fabricated with SPMCs with equal width and spacing of 100 µm, 50 µm and 25 µm, and a channel depth of 250 µm in GaN-on-Si power devices, functioning as reference heat sinks (Fig. 2a) for evaluating the performance of the co-designed electronic-microfluidic mMMC devices. Three mMMC chips with 2, 4 and 10 inlet and outlet manifold channels and identical 20 × 125 µm microchannels were fab-ricated, referred to as the 2×-, 4×- and 10×-manifold chips (Fig. 2b). Figure 2c shows a picture of the mMMC device with the 10×-manifold, including a schematic (Fig. 2d) to illustrate the flow path with coolant impinging directly onto the bottom of the GaN epilayer.
Thermo-hydraulic evaluation:
A thermo-hydraulic analysis, using de-ionized water as a coolant, was performed on the cooling structures (Fig. 2a, b) to assess the cool-ing performance by measuring the thermal resistance, pressure drop and the resulting cooling coefficient of performance (COP), which indicates the energy efficiency of the heat sink. Figure 3a shows the total thermal resistance (Rtotal) between the surface temperature rise and the inlet temperature for the evaluated structures. By reducing the SPMC channel dimensions from 100 µm to 25 µm at identical flow rates, Rtotal reduces, which can be attributed to the increased surface area for heat transfer. However, the 4×- and 10×-manifold heat sinks show an additional substantial reduction in Rtotal compared to the 25-µm SPMC, approaching the limit of single-phase water-cooling (defined by its heat capacity). Rtotal was separated into three components: the contribution due to the heating of the water based on its heat capacity (Rheat), the contribution due to convective heat transfer in the micro-channels (Rconv), and the contribution due to conduction (Rcond). The full data reduction procedure to obtain these values is explained in the Methods and in Extended Data Fig. 3. A breakdown of Rtotal is shown in Fig. 3b, revealing a strong relation between Rconv and microchannel size, where smaller channels reduce Rconv. A large decrease in Rconv was achieved with the 10×-manifold, resulting in an 85% and 76% reduc-tion compared to the 50-µm and 100-µm-wide SPMCs, respectively. In combination with a very low Rcond for the co-designed manifolds, at a flow rate of 1.0 ml s−1, a thermal resistance of 0.43 K W−1 was achieved. The 10×-manifold design thus allows heat fluxes up to 1,723 W cm−2 for a maximum temperature rise of 60 K, which is more than twice that of a 25-µm-wide SPMC.
Narrow channels, however, require a higher pressure to achieve equal flow rate (Fig. 3c). For a flow rate of 0.5 ml s−1, SPMC widths of 100 µm, 50 µm and 25 µm require pressures of 160 mbar, 260 mbar and 810 mbar, respectively. The manifold structure substantially low-ers the pressure drop by reducing the length of the flow path through the microchannel. When splitting the flow into smaller sections with the 10×-manifold, the pressure drop reduced to just 210 mbar. This highlights the benefit of the MMC structure: a lower thermal resistance than SPMCs can be obtained at a reduced pumping power consumption. However, although the manifold structure can reduce the pressure drop, the additional contractions and turns of the fluid can hinder this reduction. For example, 20-µm-wide microchannels in a 4×-manifold require a higher pressure of 1,300 mbar compared to the 25-µm-wide SPMC, which in part can also be attributed to the higher fluid veloc-ity given that the mMMC channels (125 µm) are not as deep as in the SPMC (250 µm). These findings demonstrate the need for a carefully optimized geometry of the microchannel and manifold.
Figure 3d shows a clear trend for SPMCs of increased effective base-area-averaged heat-transfer coefficient (heff) for smaller micro-channels. This is due to the combined effect of the increased sur-face area and local heat-transfer coefficient in the fully developed laminar-flow regime. The co-designed 4×-mMMC structures matches this trend with heff = 3.1 × 105 W m−2 K−1, but a large deviation from this pattern is observed when the effective length through which the cool-ant flows in the microchannel is reduced. For the 10×-manifold, heff more than doubles to 7.3 × 105 W m−2 K−1, a rise that can be attributed to the high Nusselt number owing to the developing flow in the MMC structure27,45. This effect becomes more pronounced when consider-ing the wall-area-averaged heat-transfer coefficient (hwall) (Fig. 3e), which eliminates the contribution of the increased surface area from the heat-transfer coefficient, as well as accounts for the limited fin efficiency of the channels. Over a threefold increase in hwall is observed between 25-µm-wide straight microchannels and the 10×-manifold heat sinks, up to 2.4 × 105 W m−2 K−1. This value corresponds to a very high Nusselt number of 16, generally only achieved in larger-scale systems, or in more complex two-phase cooling systems, highlighting the superior thermal performance of this structure.
The combination of improved heat transfer and reduced pressure drop leads to much lower pumping power requirements. The cooling COP is defined as the ratio of extracted power to the pumping power required to provide such a level of cooling, while maintaining a max-imum surface temperature rise of 60 K. Higher heat fluxes require higher flow rates, reducing the COP owing to the larger pumping power required. Figure 3f benchmarks the evaluated devices, along with other technologies found in the literature. For SPMC, channel widths of 100 µm, 50 µm and 25 µm show a consecutively higher COP for higher heat fluxes, with a COP in the range between 102 and 104 and heat fluxes between 350 W cm−2 and 800 W cm−2. The 10×-manifold device vastly outperforms these SPMCs. At an identical COP of 5.0 × 103, the 10×-manifold can sustain heat fluxes up to 1.7 kW cm−2 at 1.0 ml s−1, compared to 400 W cm−2, 450 W cm−2 and 550 W cm−2 for the 100-µm, 50-µm and 25-µm SPMCs, respectively. Furthermore, at a heat flux of 780 W cm−2, the 10×-manifold provides a 50-fold increase in COP with respect to 25-µm SPMCs. Compared to MMC heat sinks presented in the literature, the proposed mMMC device outperforms the current state of the art, and demonstrates a large potential for energy-efficient cooling by having a thermal-centred approach in the device design 

3.Power integrated circuit with embedded cooling:
The lateral nature of AlGaN/GaN electronics enables the monolithic integration of multiple power devices onto a single substrate. This opens up opportunities for power electronics, whereby an entire con-verter can be integrated on a small chip, with large potential for energy, cost and space savings. However, the resulting high heat fluxes limit the maximum output power of the chip. To demonstrate the potential of embedded cooling in a semiconductor device, we monolithically integrated a full-bridge rectifier onto a single GaN-on-Si die. Rectifi-cation was provided using four high-performance tri-anode Schottky barrier diodes with a breakdown voltage of 1.2 kV and high-frequency capability up to 5 MHz (ref. 46). 50-µm-wide cooling channels were integrated on the silicon substrate (Fig. 4a). To fully benefit from the compactness of high-performance microchannel cooling, a three-layer PCB with embedded coolant delivery channels was developed and used to guide the coolant to the device (Fig. 4b). The full fabrication of this monolithically integrated power device and the PCB is described in the Methods and shown in Extended Data Fig. 8. The device was finally fluidically connected to the PCB using laser-cut liquid- and solvent-resistant double-sided adhesive, providing a leak-proof con-nection. This method is low-cost and easy-to-prototype, and translates well to conventional solder bonding. Figure 4c, d shows the converter implemented, with a very compact form factor, rectifying an a.c. signal with peak voltage and current of 150 V and 1.2 A, respectively (Fig. 4e). Integrated liquid cooling led to a small temperature rise of 0.34 K per watt of output power. For a maximum temperature rise of 60 K, this single die can thus produce an output power of 176 W at a flow rate of only 0.8 ml s−1. Furthermore, the reduced operating temperature led to an increased conversion efficiency (Fig. 4f) by eliminating self-heating degradation from the electrical performance. The a.c.–d.c. converter was experimentally evaluated up to 120 W of output power, while the temperature rise stayed below 50 K (Fig. 4g). Considering the small converter volume (4.8 cm3), this corresponds to a high power density of 25 kW dm−3. Moreover, since all cooling occurs within its footprint, multiple devices can be densely packed onto the same PCB to increase the output power. This is a clear benefit over conventional heat sinks relying on heat spreading to large areas. These results show that the proposed high-performance cooling approach can enable the realiza-tion of high-power (kilowatt range) converters of the size of USB sticks in the foreseeable future.

4.Discussion and outlook:
We present an approach for co-designing microfluidics and electronics for energy-efficient cooling, and demonstrate it on GaN-on-Si power devices by turning the passive silicon substrate from a low-cost carrier into a high-performance heat sink. COP values above 10,000 for heat fluxes surpassing 1 kW cm−2 could be obtained by focusing on cooling in an early stage of the device design. As a practical implication, the average added-energy expenditure of more than 30% for cooling in data centres could potentially drop below 0.01% by adopting this design approach. The entire mMMC cooling structure can be monolithically integrated within the substrate, requiring only conventional fabrica-tion procedures, thus making this economically viable. To realize this concept, solutions for the packaging and interconnects are required. The PCB-based fluid delivery presented provides an example of a way to use these co-designed chips, based on components familiar to the electronics designer. This means that, in order to provide maximum energy savings, cooling should be an integral step in the entire elec-tronic design chain, from the device to the PCB design, and not merely an afterthought. If these practicalities can be addressed, we anticipate that the co-design of microfluidic and electronics will be appropri-ate for energy-efficient thermally-aware electronics design. This may aid in solving critical challenges in electronics applications, as well as enabling future integrated power converters on a chip to support the electrification of our society in a sustainable manner.