Validation of a NumericalQuasi-One-Dimensional Modelfor Wave Rotor Turbines WithCurved Channels 

Abstract
A wave rotor is a shock-driven pressure exchange device that, while relatively rarelystudied or indeed, employed, offers significant potential efficiency gains in a variety ofapplications including refrigeration and gas turbine topping cycles. This paper introduces a quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) wave action model implemented in MATLAB for thecomputation of the unsteady flow field and performance characteristics of wave rotors ofstraight or cambered channel profiles. The purpose here is to introduce and validate arapid but reliable method of modeling the performance of a power-generating wave rotorwhere little such insight exists in open literature. The model numerically solves the laminar one-dimensional (1D) Navier–Stokes equations using a two-step Richtmyer time variation diminishing (TVD) scheme with minmod flux limiter. Additional source termsaccount for viscous losses, wall heat transfer, flow leakage between rotor and stator endplates as well as torque generation through momentum change. Model validation wasconducted in two steps. First of all, unsteady and steady predictive capabilities weretested on three-port pressure divider rotors from open literature. The results show thatboth steady port flow conditions as well as the wave action within the rotor can be predicted with good agreement. Further validation was done on an in-house developed andexperimentally tested four-port, three-cycle, throughflow microwave rotor turbine featuring symmetrically cambered passage walls aimed at delivering approximately 500 W ofshaft power. The numerical results depict trends for pressure ratio, shaft power, and outlet temperature reasonably well. However, the results also highlight the need to accurately measure leakage gaps when the machine is running in thermal equilibrium. 

Introduction
Over the past decades, numerous research studies have beendedicated toward the investigation of dynamic pressure exchangemachinery, such as wave rotors. These devices use the energy carried in moving shock waves to transfer energy from one stream offluid to another without the need to incorporate additionalmechanical parts. This advantage, in combination with relativelylarge pressure ratio gains through shock wave compression and ahigh efficiency associated with this process, renders wave actiondevices an attractive technology for power generation.Opposed to crypto-steady flow devices, such as turbomachinery, wave rotors are inherently unsteady flow devices, whereshock and expansion waves travel along discrete channelsarranged around the circumference of a cylindrical drum. To eachside of the spinning rotor, there are stator endplates containingport openings, as shown in Fig. 1. Exposing the rotor channelsperiodically to the ports then triggers shock and expansion waves.The application range for wave rotors outlined by the literatureis diverse. The bulk of early studies focused on pressure exchangers with straight passage profiles for gas turbine topping cycles[1–8] and supercharging devices for internal combustion engines[9–16]. In recent years, the application to refrigeration cycles[17–19] and pressure-gain combustors [20–22] has come into thefocus of consideration.In comparison, little amount of attention has been given towave turbines with cambered passage walls aimed at acting bothas pressure exchangers while producing shaft power through momentum change of the flow [23–27]. Documentation of theseendeavors is unfortunately fragmentary. The best documented andmost successful example of a wave rotor engine was done byPearson [23,24] at the University of Bath. Initial tests were conducted on a single cycle, through-flow wave rotor with helicalpassage shape leading to a power output of around 26 kW at arotational speed of 18,000 rpm. Further research was suspendedafter the engine was destroyed due to overspeeding. Furtherexperiments by General Electric and General Power Corporationyielded insufficient shaft power generation and were not furtherpursued [25,26] 
One limitation of early efforts on wave rotor design was partially due to a lack in computational power rendering performanceestimation time consuming (in particular when done by hand calculations) and often inaccurate. To mitigate this and to accuratelycompute unsteady wave action in the rotor channels and steadyconditions in the ports as well as wave rotor performance parameters, one-dimensional (1D) codes have established themselves asswift and reliable tools. This has been pursued by a number ofinstitutions, ranging from the Naval Postgraduate School [28–32],University of Tokyo [6,33,34], ONERA [6,35,36], Michigan StateUniversity [37], NASA Glenn Research Center [38–42] as well asXiamen University/Beihang University [43,44] most recently.While most of the mentioned studies deal with straight channels, there is merely one study that incorporates passage curvaturein a one-dimensional environment, albeit at reduced order througha passage-averaged description. This was conducted at NASAGlenn Research Center by Welch and Paxson [42] and comparedport axial and tangential velocities as well as predicted power output to a two-dimensional computational fluid dynamics (CFD)simulation. However, no comparison with experimental data wasdone.Against this background, this paper aims at addressing this gapby introducing a one-dimensional model that allows a reliable andcost effective insight into the performance of wave rotors withstraight and arbitrarily shaped camber. To the authors’ knowledge,this paper will present, for the first time, a quasi-one-dimensional(Q1D) model that allows direct computation of torque output forcambered wave rotor channels without the need for further modelreduction. It is also the first time such a model has been comparedto experiments. Conventional 1D models for turbines and compressors employ either a map-based approach that requires a prioriexperimental data in the form of mass flow rate, efficiency, andpressure ratio [45] or model the rotor wheel through an adiabaticpressure loss that is calibrated over the anticipated flow rangeagainst experimental data [46]. The proposed model, however,differs to that approach as directly models the unsteady waveaction dynamics within the rotor while accounting for finite passage opening, friction, leakage, and inviscid forces.The structure of the paper is thus as follows: first, the governingequations and model source terms for viscous and inviscid forces,flow leakage, and wall heat transfer are introduced; second, steadyand unsteady validation of the code is done based on experimentaldata from the open literature on pressure dividers done by Kentfield [47] and NASA [48]. Further validation of the model isachieved through experimental data from a wave rotor turbineexperiment performed in the gas stand at the University of Bath.The wave rotor turbine features a symmetrical, arc-shaped passage design that was designed to produce a power output of up to500 W.Simulation Model
The model was implemented in MATLAB R2017 and follows asingle wave rotor passage of constant cross section as it passesports along the circumference. It consists of numerical routines tosolve the one-dimensional conservation equations accounting forchannel curvature for shaft power extraction, heat transferbetween fluid and rotor walls, flow leakage in the axial clearancebetween stator and rotor, as well as gradual passage openingeffects. The code can be applied to both through-flow and reverseflow wave rotor applications.Finally, the user has the option of defining the gas compositionfor the operating medium. Throughout this study, this is assumedto be air, composed of 79% nitrogen and 21% oxygen.For the derivation of the model, a number of assumptions aremade; first of all, in order to justify a one-dimensional formulation, channel length is expected to be an order of magnitude largerthan channel width and height. Furthermore, the flow path followsa single streamline through the passage. The quasi-onedimensional formulation assumes that all quantities are uniform across the cross section. This does not hold for wave rotors, ashigh rotational speeds due to centrifugal effects, vortices due tofinite passage opening effects, and shock-wave boundary layerinteractions create secondary flows and skewed air/gas demarcation surfaces, which cannot be captured using one-dimensionalwave action codes. While the effect of gradual passage openingon the primary shock strength can at least be qualitatively captured, interferences between neighboring channels and betweenthe channel and leakage cavity, which become particularly pronounced for larger axial clearances between rotor and stator, cannot be depicted directly.Governing Equations. The equations used to describe theunsteady, compressible, and viscous effects taking place within awave rotor turbine are the one-dimensional Navier–Stokes equations, which can be written in conservative form as 
The first term represents time-dependent variations, while the second term refers to advection. The source term S accounts for viscous as well as inviscid effects (i.e., friction and “blade” forces),as well as leakage losses and wall heat transfer. These will beexplained in more detail in the section Source Terms. The statevector U and the flux vector F are defined as 
Heat conduction within the fluid is addressed through Fourier’slaw of heat conduction. Furthermore, friction between particles isincluded through shear force. They can be more explicitly statedas 
The set of PDEs encompasses four primitive variables u, q, p, ande, which require the introduction of an additional equation toensure closure of the equation system. This is done by the idealgas equation relating pressure, temperature, and density 
The model further treats air as a calorically imperfect gas, wherespecific heat constant at constant pressure cp ¼ f(T) varies withtemperature. While this is less important for pressure exchangers,where temperatures can be close to ambient conditions, itbecomes more important at elevated temperatures exhibited in gasturbines, where the peak cycle temperature delivered from thecombustor exceeds 450–500 K [49]. Thermodynamic data for specific heat constant and internal energy used throughout this studystem from GRI-MECH [50] and the thermal database provided byVirginia Tech [51]. Finally, dynamic viscosity is modeled throughthe well-known Sutherland relation.Source TermsViscous and Inviscid Forces. The previous one-dimensionalmodels addressed merely viscous (friction) forces and did notdirectly address inviscid profile forces that account for shaftpower generation. Fluid viscosity determines wall friction andpromotes convective heat transfer. As a result, the correspondingsource term affects both the momentum and the energy equation.Friction force is defined as 
It features a friction multiplier Cf that accounts for additionalmomentum losses that cannot be captured with the relatively simple approach taken. As stated by Winterbone and Pearson [52],the friction factor f is a function of the Reynolds number withinthe channel and is given by 
where k denotes the surfaces roughness value, which was set to25 lm. Using the force diagram shown in Fig. 2(c), one can workout the tangential component of the friction factor and write thetotal source term as 
Torque generation in wave rotors is pulsatile in nature and is primarily generated when the channels are exposed to a high pressure inlet port. Throughout this study, tangential forces and thuspower generation are computed as a result of the momentumchange as the fluid travels along the cambered channel walls. 
Overall, this is exemplified by the change in velocity triangles atleading and trailing edge of a passage wall, as shown in Fig. 2(a).The corresponding blade force source term affects momentum andenergy equation and takes the form 
The tangential blade force per unit volume can be determinedusing the change in momentum, which is influenced by the difference in absolute tangential velocity Ch across leading and trailingedge, the mass flow rate through the channel m_ , and the channelvolume V. In the discretized domain, this force is calculated foreach element taking the difference in the tangential velocity vector from one cell to the next into account 
Friction forces are accounted for by the previously suggested viscous source term. Thus, the blade force source term acts in aninviscid way so that one can assume the blade force vector to beorthogonal to the relative velocity vector, as given in Fig. 2(b).Hence, the scalar product of blade force vector and relative velocity vector equals zero and the equation can be rearranged to givethe axial inviscid blade force per unit volume 
In reality, the port angles will be aligned at a different angle thanthe passage walls angle. This can take place at off-design conditions or if an additional momentum change is desired at the statorrotor interface in order to create more torque. In addition, flowseparation on the passage wall “suction side” can often be witnessed if the port angle is considerably larger than the passagewall angle. To account for such incidence losses, an additionalentropy-based loss coefficient is introduced and applied in theform of a distributed loss factor. It can be calibrated throughexperimental data or three-dimensional CFD simulations 
Flow Leakage. 
The effect of leakage is a crucial factor in waverotor performances and was modeled as a simple, nonlabyrinthleak in similar fashion as in the previous publications from Kentfield, NASA, and ONERA [35,39,53]. Leakage is modeled as alumped capacitance model assuming steady flow equations. Itconcerns both continuity as well as energy equation, so that theleakage source term may be stated as 
where CD is the discharge coefficient, p and q the pressure and thedensity in channel or cavity, respectively, h denotes enthalpy, dlthe axial clearance between rotor and stator, and Dz the cell sizeused for discretization. The leakage function U takes up the form,which allows to differentiate between flow entering and leavingthe cavity depending on the pressure ratio in cell and leakagecavity 
The source terms are only active at the extremities of the rotorchannel and are set to zero in the remainder of the domain. Aftereach cycle, the mass and energy balance are computed, and thecavity pressure and temperature updated from a first-order systemof differential equations as provided by Eq. (16). The equationsdesignate continuity and the energy equation derived from the firstlaw of thermodynamics and are integrated in time using anexplicit Runge–Kutta scheme. Cavity pressure can be found byapplying the equation of state for ideal gases 
The heat transfer term stands for the heat transfer from the waverotor wall temperature. For the respective heat transfer coefficient,a Nusselt number relation for annuli with inner cylinder rotationwas used [54] 
Wall Heat Transfer.
 The viscous source term given in Eq. (7)features the wall temperature to compute convective heat transfer.During operation and constant inlet temperatures from the ports,the rotor temperature settles at a constant value. In order toinclude the effect of wall heat transfer, a lumped capacitancemodel that follows the first-order differential equation given inEq. (18) was implemented 
Domain Discretization.
The explicit, second-order accuratescheme of Richtmyer in combination with a minmod flux limiterof Roe and Baines was selected for the discretization of the governing equations in space and time. This allows for an accurateresolution of flow discontinuities while obeying time variationdiminishing criterion and preventing spurious oscillations fromtaking place in their vicinity. The proposed scheme suggests atwo-step technique where additional half timesteps are introduced.The first step consists of a first-order accurate Lax-Friedrichsmethod, which can be obtained through the integration of Eq. (1)in space and time and assuming the intercell fluxes to be the average of two consecutive cells 
Boundary Conditions
For the implementation of boundary conditions, a cell-centeredapproach has been chosen. This involves the addition of an imagecell lying just outside of the domain. In general, one can distinguish between inflow, outflow, and wall boundaries. For each ofthese types, one needs to determine the flow variables on theimage cells. Walls are treated as reflective boundaries where pressure and density are equal to the neighboring interior cell node,while velocity is assigned the same value with the opposite sign.Assuming subsonic inflow, it is necessary to specify two characteristics entering the domain, while one characteristic leaves thedomain. Therefore, stagnation properties (temperature and pressure) are imposed, while velocity is extrapolated in the zerothorder. This approach further guarantees a simple way to compareresults with experimental conditions. When computing the flowvariables at the image cell, it is crucial to consider that the stagnation properties are defined in the absolute frame of reference,while the code operates in the relative frame of reference.For outflows, one characteristic enters the domain, while twocharacteristics leave the domain. Thus, a single physical conditionneeds to be imposed (static outlet pressure) and the remaining twoare extrapolated from the domain interior.Unfortunately, this is only valid for fully exposed channels.There are, however, periods where only a certain portion of thechannel is exposed to a port, as shown in Fig. 3(a). This gradualpassage opening is of paramount importance in the formation ofprimary shock waves [55]. To account for this, a function is defined that determines the amount of overlap based on port opening and closing positions, channel width, and the channel positionat each time-step.If this function is between zero and one, the port is only partially open and an alternative solution for the boundary conditionsis calculated. In the case of inflow, the principle is given in Fig.3(b). The gas enters the domain from a reservoir described bystagnation properties for pressure and temperature in the form of ajet through the cross section area at station 2. At station 1, the jetfurther expands to cover the entire width. The first cell in thedomain is at station i. Assuming steady flow conditions, one canformulate the three conservative equations for mass, momentum,and energy between stations 1 and 2 as 
giving three equations for six unknowns in total. The set of equations is closed using the energy equation and isentropic relationbetween stations 0 and 1 as well as wave and pathline compatibility relations [52]. In a similar fashion, one can formulate the problem for partially open outflows, as given in Fig. 3(c). Here, gasflowing through a cross-sectional area of A1 exits the domainthrough area A2. In the subsonic case, the pressure at station 2equals the reservoir pressure at plane 2. Together with the conservation of mass and energy as well as the isentropic relationbetween stations 1 and 2 and the corresponding compatibilityequations, all six unknowns can be determined.ProcedureThe solution procedure of the code shall be introduced usingthe example of a four-port throughflow wave rotor, as shown inthe unfolded view of a single wave rotor cycle in the z t/h planein Fig. 4. The ports are designated as high pressure gas inlet(HPG), high pressure air (HPA), low pressure air (LPA), and lowpressure gas (LPG), referring to high pressure gas and air and lowpressure air and gas, respectively.It follows the steps outlined in Fig. 5(b). Initially, geometricdimensions of the rotor and target rotational speed of the waverotor are specified. Furthermore, the number of cycles per rotationand the port solution needs to be provided. An initial guess andrough layout can be devised through the analytical tools given by Chan and Liu [43] and M€ uller and coworkers [56–58]. Subsequently, all matrices used throughout the computation are, alongwith the spatial domain, initialized. In terms of the time-step, aninitial estimation is provided. While a uniform grid is used, thetime-step size is allowed to vary depending on the maximumwave speed maxi_x0007_  jun i j þ an i in the domain at the previous timestep and a fixed CFL number of 0.7 [52]. This allows us to savecomputational time as otherwise a constant time-step would needto suit the largest velocities in the domain and would thus have tobe more on the conservative side.In open loop configuration (without a closed combustor loop),stagnation properties in the HPG port are fixed, while static pressure in the HPA port is varied automatically using a simple proportional controller based on a simple Bernoulli relation until themass flow rates are matched and within a 2% relative error. Thelow pressure inlet conditions generally involve ambient temperature of around 300 K, while the total inlet pressure again beingvaried in the same manner as for the HPA port and according tothe desired loop flow ratio 
In the low pressure gas port, exhaust gases are expelled to theambient and the static pressure is again automatically adjusted togive the desired inlet mass flow rate m_ HPG. At the end of eachcycle, combustor and leakage cavity properties are updated andport flow conditions need to be determined. This is done through mass flux averaging according to Eq. (25) and converting the values into the absolute frame of reference 
Before the next cycle commences, conditions within the channelat the cycle end are set as initial conditions for the subsequentcycle, thus guaranteeing periodicity. Finally, the simulation isstopped either when the maximum number of cycles is reached orthe relative changes of combustor and leakage temperature andpressures are below a predefined threshold 
Results and Discussion. 
The results presented in the sectionResults and Discussion seek to exhibit the code’s ability to predictresults from wave rotor experiments. This shall be done in twostages. First of all, performance data of two three-port pressure dividers are produced and compared with data from the open literature. These are Kentfield’s pressure divider from the 1960s [47]and NASA pressure divider from the mid-1990 s [48]. After that,laboratory experiments conducted at the University of Bath on al-wave rotor turbine are used to test the code when dealing withfour port, throughflow wave rotor turbines with symmetricallycambered profiles.Wave Rotor Pressure Dividers. The geometric dimensionsand operating conditions of the two investigated designs are givenin Table 1. The main characteristics of both designs shall bebriefly introduced. Kentfield’s device is characterized by relatively large channel width, while NASA’s three-port design hasfour times the number of channels and has, as a consequence, arather small channel width. Thus, it can be expected that finiteopening timing effects are of minor importance. In terms oflength, the NASA design is longer, so that viscous losses becomemore pronounced. Leakage plays a reduced role in Kentfield’sexperiments owing to tighter clearances between the rotor and stator endwalls.Rotational speed of both designs and total inlet temperature inthe medium pressure port are fixed in both simulations. Total inletpressure in the medium pressure port is variable for the Kentfieldexperiments. In the model, the total outlet pressure of the highpressure port is varied in both cases to give a desired mass flowratio m_ M=m_ H ranging from 0.1 to 0.6. The NASA experiment wasconducted at a constant mass flow ratio of 0.37. The unfoldedmidplane view for the two pressure exchangers with the anticipated wave pattern and relative positions of the three respectiveports is given in Fig. 6. Solid red curves denote shock waves,hatched blue areas expansion fans, and dashed gray lines (weak)pressure waves.Using the MATLAB code on Kentfield’s three-port pressuredivider yields the results depicted in Fig. 7. All data were produced with a grid resolution of Dz/L ¼ 0.0135 and a dischargecoefficient of 0.67 and a friction multiplier of 1.77. The plotsshow total pressure for the high pressure port on the ordinate andtotal pressure for the low pressure port on the abscissa for four different mass flow ratios. All values are nondimensionalized withrespect to the inlet total pressure and inlet mass flow rate, respectively. Figure 7(a) shows a comparison of the 1D-Navier–Stokesequation (that includes particle friction and heat conduction in thefluid but without wall heat transfer, friction, and leakage model)compared with the experimental data. Clearly, the pressure levelin the high pressure port is overpredicted with an increasing deviation toward lower pressure levels in the low pressure port. The full model results are then shown in Fig. 7(b) outlining the effectlosses impart. The main loss mechanisms responsible for the difference are leakage and friction, confirming the findings of theprevious studies [35,39]. Since maximum temperatures in bothcases are relatively low, wall heat transfer plays a minor role.The same model parameters were then applied to performunsteady validation using the NASA three-port wave rotor. Thisexperiment featured static pressure traces at three locations,namely at z/L ¼ 0.025, z/L ¼ 0.5, and z/L ¼ 0.975, within a waverotor passage as it travels through the circumference. Evaluatingthe numerical results and normalized static pressure at the channelends, namely at data against the numerical results, gives the distribution shown in Fig. 8. In comparison with Fig. 6(b), one can witness the initial expansion fan generated upon opening the lowpressure port on the right-hand side. This is well captured in themodel, although the expansion ratio at z/L ¼ 0.025 remainsslightly overpredicted. The subsequent shock discontinuity issharper than in the experiments and features a sharp peak for bothprimary and secondary shock waves. The overall shock pressureratio across all stations is, however, well depicted. The finalexpansion fan as well as the attenuation of the pressure wave takes place slightly sooner, as seen at around 
Bath l-Wave Rotor TurbineLayout and Operating Conditions. The third validation casedeals with a four-port, three-cycle throughflow wave rotor withsymmetrically cambered wall profiles. The rotor was designed toyield approximately 500 W of shaft power output at a target peakcycle temperature of 750 C and HPG total inlet pressure of285 kPa. The port solution is shown in Fig. 4 and can be dividedinto a high pressure and low pressure section in the bottom andtop, respectively. The former encompasses a HPG and a HPA outlet that would form the combustor loop in a gas turbine arrangement, while the latter houses the LPA inlet and a LPG outlet . Adetailed view of the symmetrically cambered wall profiles and aphotograph of the rotor and endplates with the corresponding portopenings are given in Figs. 9(a) and 9(b).Geometric dimensions and operating conditions that will beused for the simulations are given in Table 2. The rotor has a midwidth diameter of 60 mm, length of 30 mm, and features 46 symmetrically cambered channels with a maximum profile angle of21.5 deg. In total, three cycles are covered in a single rotation andthe design speed is set to 32,000 rpm, giving a tangential speed inthe midwidth plane of 100 m/s.The wave rotor test rig encompasses an open loop configuration, as shown in Fig. 10(a). A set of industrial compressors provides pressurized and dry air to the inlet side (HPG and LPA).The corresponding flow rates and thus the flow ratio k are controlled through a set of pneumatically actuated gate valves andmeasured through differential mass flow meters. On the HPG leg,the incoming air is additionally directed through an air-to-air heatexchanger to use hot exhaust gases from the outlet side beforebeing run through a set of 44 kW-electrical heaters that ensure thetarget inlet temperature is reached. Rotational speed and shaftpower output is measured through an eddy-current dynamometerthat modulates the load on the wave rotor. It is coupled to thewave rotor through a single-plane coupling. On the outlet side,further gate valves ensure the mass flow rates in the high pressurezone, i.e., between HPG and HPA, can be matched accuratelybefore being expelled from the test chamber through extractionfans. Figure 10(b) exhibits a photograph from the test chamberdisplaying the electrical heaters as well as the wave rotor anddynamometer units and outlet gate valves.The design of the wave rotor encompassed a variable nominalaxial clearance between 0.1 and 0.4 mm. Unfortunately, it wasfound during the experiments that the nominal clearance differedsignificantly from its design value due to uneven thermal expansion. As the exact values of the actual clearances could not bedetermined, it was decided to use the nominal values for throughout the validation study.Rotor Characteristics. Before moving on to the results, it isnecessary to classify the wave rotor performance with respect toother existing machines. Table 3 lists a comparison of nondimensional performance parameters for finite passage opening T, viscosity F, and leakage flow G for various wave rotor types, asdefined by Nagashima et al. [6] and Wilson and Fronek [48].Although comparison is somewhat difficult for pure pressureexchangers and wave rotor turbines operating at high temperatures, one can see that the Bath l-wave rotor performs similarlywith respect to finite opening timing effects despite its short rotorlength. As expected, due to the small size compared with largerdesigns, viscous losses become more pronounced and is similar tothe microwave rotor study conducted at the University of Tokyo& ONERA [6]. The most critical loss mechanism for the investigated design is without a doubt leakage effects, which is at bestsimilar to the ABB Comprex and the University of Tokyo. In reality, however, it is anticipated that uneven thermal expansion ofstators and the shaft-rotor assembly account for a considerably larger G-parameter approaching 0.2–0.23. This effect however,cannot be captured in a one-dimensional environment and needsto be taken into account through the leakage coefficient CD. Anadditional effect of leakage that cannot be identified using onedimensional code is that increasing leakage gaps promote theinteraction between neighboring channels effectively attenuatingin particular the reflected secondary shock extensively.Model Validation. For the first part of the experimental validation, rotational speed was swept from 24,000 rpm to the designspeed of 32,000 rpm in steps of around 2000 rpm. This is done fortwo different nominal leakage gaps, namely 0.20 mm on the inletand 0.25 mm on the outlet side as well as 0.3 mm on both in- andoutlet side, respectively. In addition, the peak cycle temperatureTt,HPG was varied from 500 C to 600 C. The loop flow ratio k ismaintained constant at 1.7. In the second part of the validationstudy, k is varied in steps of 0.5 between 1.7 and 2.7. The totalinlet pressure remains at approximately 270 kPa throughout.Variations in rotational speed lead to different velocity trianglesat both in- and outlet. To account for these variations and associated misalignment of the flow with the rotor profiles, a parameterfit was made for the loss coefficient floss. The linear relationshipdetermined from this is given in Fig. 11(a) and used throughoutthe validation study. The same procedure was applied to the leakage coefficient CD. Here, the situation becomes more complicated as different leakage gaps account for slightly different characteristics, as illustrated in Fig. 11(b). The reason for this lies most likelyin the fact that actual leakage gaps are not known and merely thenominal values were taken. Hence, the selected discharge coefficient partially accounts for this lack in information. The reasonwhy one sees a variation of the leakage coefficient with speed canbe explained by additional blockage or greater dynamic head created in the leakage gap through higher rotational speeds, similaras witnessed in turbomachinery [59]. Finally, the friction multiplier was set to 2.7 throughout the simulations. A similarly highvalue was witnessed in the studies by Paxson and Wilson [39].At the design speed of 32,000 rpm Fig. 12 gives the numericallydetermined unfolded view of both wave pattern in the left-handside contour plot and temperature distribution in the right-handcontour plot. The plot also shows the predicted velocity profiles ineach port and the extent of gradual passage opening. Marked instations S1 and S2 are primary (right running) and secondaryshock (left running) waves generated upon opening of the highpressure gas (HPG) inlet and high pressure air (HPA) outlet. Further shown are expansion fans E1 and E2 produced as a result ofHPG closing and LPG opening. The temperature distribution indicates inherent exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) characteristic toaxial throughflow machines as well as a small amount of fresh airexhaustion (FAE) through the exhaust port LPG.The effect of gradual passage opening is shown in Fig. 12(b),where mark T1 indicates the initiation of the primary shock wave before progressively increases toward the fully developed level atapproximately T2. The predicted instantaneous and cycleaveraged power output for a single channel is given in Fig. 12(c).It becomes apparent that solely the flow entering through the HPGport results in torque generation, while opening of the LPG portand inflow through LPA does not significantly contribute to overall power generation. This is of course expected as the flowthrough the HPG port signifies the flow with the highest enthalpy.The total expected power output is then evaluated by multiplyingthe number of channels with the cycle-averaged value. The plotfurther indicates that the proposed symmetric, arc shape is not anoptimum with respect to torque generation, which is outlined bypositive regions in the instantaneous power trace near openingand closure of the HPG port.Comparing power output, pressure ratio, and outlet temperaturefrom the HPA duct for the experimentally determined dataset withthe simulation model shows the group of plots displayed inFig. 13. The first plot on the top left denotes total pressure ratiodata obtained for a maximum inlet temperature of 500 C and anominal clearance of 0.20 mm on the inlet and 0.25 mm on theoutlet side. The model accurately predicts the total pressure distribution well across the entire speed sweep. As expected, increasedleakage gaps result in compromised energy transfer and thuslower achieved pressure ratio. This trend is reflected in the modelresults, although there is an overprediction in pressure ratio with arelative error between experiments and simulation of around10–15%. Furthermore, the model predicts a pronounced drop-offin pressure ratio as one approaches lower rotational speeds, whichhas not been witnessed in the experiments. Opposed to the validation on pure pressure exchangers of Kentfield and NASA, there isa more pronounced discrepancy between simulation results andexperimental data. This can at least partly be attributed to the factthat experimental work on pressure exchangers was done at nearlyambient temperature conditions. This renders thermal expansioneffects; minimal and axial clearances between stator and rotors are likely to remain unchanged from their nominal values. For thewave rotor turbine under investigation here, peak temperaturesdiffer significantly from ambient conditions and uneven thermalexpansion between rotor and stators that cause the axial clearancegap to increase in size, which severely affects in particular thesecondary shock wave strength and thus the achieved pressureratio.Raising maximum inlet temperature from 500 C to 600 Cresults in an increase in pressure ratio as a consequence of moreenthalpy being directed to the wave rotor. While the overall trendis also reflected in the simulation results, the model indicates thatthe increase in temperature appears to outweigh the penalty inlarger leakage flow, while in the experiments this is clearly notthe case. This shortcoming exemplifies the sensitivity of the system that arises when choosing model factors, thus limiting its predictive capabilities. 
The model yields good results with respect to predicted poweroutput for all simulated conditions, shown in Fig. 13(b). Power isslightly overpredicted throughout with a relative error of around5–10%. The power output increase shown in (b) stems from anincrease in HPG mass flow rate of 34 g/s compared to 32 g/s in thelow leakage case.Finally, Fig. 13(c) gives a comparison of the averaged totaltemperature at the HPA outlet with the experimental data recordedthrough thermocouples close to the port outlet. Across all testedconditions, the relative error varies between 1% and 6%. Whilethere seems to be moderate (left and right) to no (center) variationwith respect to rotational speed changes, the model predictssteeper line gradients. This is a consequence of the model predictions regarding exhaust gas recirculation at the HPA port. Thetemperature distribution shown in Fig. 12 implies some FAE.Reducing FAE by allowing more fresh air being directed to theHPA port before the port closes. This reduces EGR rates at theHPA port and accounts for a slightly lower mixed-out temperature. This effect is well shown in Fig. 13(a). The simulationresults in (center) and (right) almost show the same gradient withrespect to speed as in the low leakage case in (left). The discrepancy between the two stems again from the effects of leakage,where increased leakage promotes interaction and flow betweenone channel, another channel, and the leakage cavities around it.Thus more hot air is ingested into the cold air stream leading tomore or less the same average outlet temperature.Figure 14 exhibits the effect of a variation in loop flow ratiofrom 1.7–2.2 and 2.7 with rotational speed. The model correctlypredicts an increase in pressure ratio with increasing loop flowratio. However, while there is a relatively small difference at aloop flow ratio of 1.7 of less than 3%, the model reacts more sensitively to an increase in loop flow ratio resulting in higher pressure ratios and increased error. Higher loop flow ratio signifies areduced cold air mass being ingested into the wave rotor resultingin a higher average rotor temperature and thus altered thermalexpansion. The Q1D-model cannot account for this change inleakage characteristic, which results in a greater error between thesimulation results and the experimentally determined data. 
Predicted shaft power output captures the trends of increasingpower output with increasing loop flow ratio. The main mechanism for this is an increase in inlet mass flow rates to around 34 g/s at k ¼ 2.2 and 35.5 g/s at k ¼ 2.7. However, the increase indicated in the experiments is higher than shown for the simulationmodel, resulting at a maximum underprediction in shaft power atk ¼ 2.7 of approximately 8%.Looking at the averaged temperature in the HPA port, the maximum relative error between experiments and simulations is ataround 4%. The model is able to predict the effects of the decreasein fresh air flow well. Higher loop flow ratios increase EGR andthus mark a reduced effect of fresh air temperature on the mixedout average temperature. As a result, average temperaturesincrease as is both witnessed in the model and experiments. Furthermore, varying rotational speed has most influence on HPAoutlet temperature at low loop flow ratios, where EGR rate is generally lower. At higher flow ratios, EGR rate is high and the HPAtemperature less sensitive to a variation in rotational speed. Thiseffect is recorded in the simulation results through a reducedgradient.
Conclusions and Outlook. 
This paper presented a numericalmodel that extends the previous one-dimensional codes to allowcomputation of torque generation in curved rotor passages throughadditional source terms that compute inviscid blade forces. Themodel was furthermore validated through both literature data andexperimental data from a symmetrically cambered microwaverotor developed at the University of Bath. The main points of thepaper can be summarized as follows: The objective of the study was to perform model validationthrough literature data for straight channeled pressureexchangers run at low temperature and through experimentaldata obtained from a symmetrically cambered microwaverotor developed at the University of Bath. The comparison with literature data for pressure exchangersat constant speed and inlet conditions yields good agreementfor both steady and unsteady flow data. This gives confidence that the model is able to predict fundamental characteristics,such as wave patterns and port flow conditions. It furtheremphasizes the importance of loss mechanisms on the performance characteristics of wave rotors. A comparison of the model with sub-1 kW microwave rotorturbine data yielded promising results and showed that themodel is able to identify the variation of pressure ratio andtemperature with rotational speed. Predicted power outputwas also in very good agreement with the experimental data.Nonetheless, a few restrictions in the model persist and canbe listed as follows:– The model appears to react more sensitively to changesin inlet temperature and leakage gap than witnessed inthe experiments 
Increases in nominal leakage lead to a larger relativeerror between the determined total pressure ratio forexperiments and simulation. The issue is exacerbated ifonly the nominal, rather than the actual leakage gap for athermally stable operating point is known rendering thedetermination of leakage coefficients difficult and resultsmore deviating from experimentally determined ones.– Power predictions are slightly overpredicted throughout,but show similar trends as in the experiments and varyonly marginally with respect to changes in rotationalspeed. However, an additional loss factor is required toaccount for the (mis-)alignment of the flow at the port/rotor interface. For higher loop flow ratios, the increasein power output in the simulation results is lower compared to the experiments, resulting in a slight underprediction for k ¼ 2.2.The model is able to predict port outlet temperatureswell, but fails to identify the effects larger leakage gapsincur. The effect of reduced EGR rates and thus morefresh air being directed through the HPA port appears tobe more pronounced than witnessed in the experiments.Also, the ingestion of air from neighboring channels andthe leakage cavity seem to become more pronounced atelevated leakage gaps, which cannot be identified by themodel. However, trends showing the effect of increasedloop flow ratio on the outlet temperature are capturedwell. The introduced model facilitates wave rotor turbine designprocess, as it provides the means to investigate both the pressure exchange capabilities of the wave rotor as well as its use as a power turbine. It can thus be used for initial sizing andas an inexpensive design tool to vary channel camber beforemore expensive CFD modeling tools are applied. 