ABSTRACT
An interconnected energy hubs (EHs) framework aims to enhance the efficiency of the multicarrier
energy system through realizing optimal coordination among existing players. In this paper, EH concept
is studied in networked microgrids (MGs) structure to exploit the potential capabilities of microgrids in
satisfying various types of energy demands. In the proposed model, MGs and distribution network are
independent entities which have their local scheduling problem. To coordinate the operation of entities,
a distributed algorithm based on the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) is exploited to
resolve the conflict of exchanged power between multi-MGs and distribution network. Considering the
uncertainties, a distributed robust model is employed to precisely analyze the performance of multi-
carrier energy networked MGs in different robustness levels. The efficiency of the ADMM model on
integrated energy systems is tested on a networked MGs. The achieved results can ensure the light
computational burden and convergence of proposed distributed algorithm. The proposed EH optimiza-
tion problem is solved via Gurobi optimizer packages. According to the results, the ADMM converges to
the final solution after 5 iterations, and with increasing the robustness level, the operation costs of EHs
increases. The obtained results by Gurobi is more optimal than heuristic algorithms.
1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation and significance
The development of dispatchable and non-dispatchable
renewable energy sources has affected the energy networks and
introduced brand new energy concepts. The energy hub (EH)
concept is one of the important consequences of renewable energy
utilization. The energy hub is a concept by which the energy con-
version, storage and generation can be realized in a higher effi-
ciency. The EH integrates a wide range of energy sources aiming at
increasing a network efficiency and decreasing the energy wasting.
Besides, deployment of distributed energy resources (DERs) can
lead a system towards an economical, environmentally friendlyand
flexible network [1]. According to the energy hub concept, various
energy carriers are exploited to satisfy a range of energy demands
at any given time slot [2]. Today’s energy hubs take advantage of
modern technologies such as storage systems, and optimal control
centers for energy management and energy trading purposes.
Considering this capability, the size of EHs can include a wide range
of the energy system depending on demands, infrastructures and
financial budget [3].
The necessity of energy hubs is realized when the optimal
operation of integrated energy systems leads the network toward
efficient utilization of existing energy sources to satisfy different
demands with minimum economic and emission costs [4]. To
achieve optimal operation of multiple EHs, different methods have
been already proposed. In Ref. [5], a mixed integer nonlinear pro-
gramming (MINLP) model is applied for the sake of direct inter-
plant heat integration to make the controllability of energy hubs
flexible when accidentally shutdowns happen; however, the coor-
dination between EHs is not discussed and guaranteed for the large
networks. In Ref. [6], three different schemes are discussed. In the
first one, energy hubs operate independently without any energy
sharing with other entities. In the second scheme, EHs can share
energy with each other through pool-market concept, while the
impact of aggregator can be observed in last scheme in which the
game-theoretic approach based on Stackelberg game is proposed to
solve the energy hub problem in a bilevel scheme. The conditional
value-at-risk (CVaR) algorithm is employed in Ref. [7] to ensure the
optimal operation of smart EHs when it comes to a potential risk in
energy hub dailyscheduling. To simplifya complicated EH, Liu et al.
[8] have divided the complicated model to several simple EHs, and
then an approach based on virtual nodes insertion is employed to
solve the EH problem. To ensure the optimal costs of energy hubs, a
probabilistic approach based on Monte Carlo method is used totake
variations of renewable sources into account [9]. Benders decom-
position (BD) algorithm is employed to address the environmental
and social objectives of EHs and decrease the computational
burdenof EH problem [10]. In Ref. [11], the uncertainty dealing with
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) is modeled using
information gap decision theory (IGDT) to exactly determine the
risk-averse and risk-seeking strategies of the EH. To model the
optimal bidding strategy of energy hub, a stochastic optimization
model is adopted in Ref. [12] to handle the uncertainties associated
with market price and wind energy.
Smart grid technology specifically microgrids (MGs) concept has
changed the reconfiguration of distribution networks and made the
power system sustainable, reliable, and economical [13]. The U.S.
Department of Energy (DOE) clearly defines the microgrid as a key
component of smart grid aiming at enhancing reliability, resiliency,
energy efficiency, and quality [14]. Although microgrids have many
technical benefits, they may have some environmental issues,
which should be considered. In Refs. [15], the authors have dis-
cussed the fuel-based and renewables microgrid in Canada.
Nowadays, in Canada, the experts and organizations try to consider
social and environmental benefits of microgrids along with
economical aspects. Besides, the authors in Ref. [16] have consid-
ered the environmental aspects of islanded microgrids by propos-
ing an optimal planning model aiming at decreasing the
environmental issues of microgrids. The concept of the micro en-
ergy grid is employed in Ref. [17] to realize the main goals of EHs
considering the optimal coordination between energy carriers. It
should be mentioned that MGs were previously utilized as a
framework for satisfying the electrical power scheduling in distri-
bution networks. The most important objectives of electrical MGs
are to minimize the operation cost of small-scale energy zones [18],
enhance the resiliency of the grid in case of natural disasters [19],
and increase the reliability [20]. Moreover, in Ref. [21], the stability
issue of microgrids in both interconnected and islanding mode is
improved using large-signal-based control topology for distributed
generator (DG) power converter. The power quality is another
important issue in power systems, which is improved in inter-
connected DC microgrids [22]. In Ref. [23], the authors have used a
two-stage stochastic optimization problem to solve optimal oper-
ation of energy hubs. The proposed solution ensures the optimal
scheduling of energy resources and reserve capacity. Moreover, the
authors have assumed that the limits for energy flows, voltage
magnitudes, and nodal natural gas pressures are in acceptable
range so that the security of the network is guaranteed. In Ref. [24],
EH takes advantage of the generation-storage framework of a
microgrid to ensure the optimal scheduling of multi-energy car-
riers; however, the proposed structure of the MG and EH formu-
lation is simple and the proposed model can face with significant
challenges in larger and multiple interconnected energy entities. In
Ref. [25], AC/DC microgrid is employed to increase the energy
trading between energy providers and consumers through
ensuring efficient energy conversion using a two-stage chance-
constrained bidding scheme. Interconnected MGs are used in
Ref. [26] aiming to optimally coordinate the energy performance of
entities, and a distributed stochastic method is used to solve the
daily scheduling problem which requires a minimum range of in-
formation; however, the performance of proposed method is not
precisely discussed the optimal coordination between MGs in en-
ergy interaction.
1.2. Related works
Several studies have been carried out so far to address the co-
ordinated operation of multiple MGs in which microgrids have
energy interactions with each other through the distribution
network [27]. In Ref. [28], a decent study has been reported on
various energy management systems (EMS) applicable to multi-
MGs, and a new structure based on nested energy management is
presented to ensure the security of each entity and fix the existing
drawbacks of conventional EMSs. In centralized energy manage-
ment system of MGs, EMS aims to optimize the existing objective
function for the entire network [29]. In this type of management
system, all available entities should send their local and private
data and information to the central EMS operator or distribution
network operator (DNO), and then the operation cost of each MG is
optimized by external decision-maker. Therefore, the centralized
energy management system not only cannot guarantee the security
of the entities but also cannot ensure the optimal coordination
between MGs. On the other hand, decentralized energy manage-
ment system of MGs is offered to fix the drawbacks of centralized
EMS when it comes to interconnected operation of networked MGs
[30]. To solve the optimization problem in decentralized mode of
networked MGs, distributed algorithms are needed. In Ref. [31], a
model predictive control (MPC) is employed to optimally manage
the interaction of power among microgrids. Nevertheless, this
technique strongly needs to identify the system model. Besides, the
alternating direction method of multipliers algorithm is employed
in Ref. [32] to satisfy optimal power trading between MGs and
distribution network. In Ref. [33], Lagrangian relaxation is used for
decentralizing the isolated MGs so that power exchanging is real-
ized. A non-cooperative game-theoretic approach is employed in
Ref. [34] to guarantee the optimal coordinating control among
multi-MGs. Nevertheless, a few studies have been carried out in
multiple energy carriers networked MGs. The existing studies have
tremendously focused on electrical energy in networked MGs and
paid less attention to other types of energy carriers.
In [35], the authors have utilized an iterative algorithm to
optimally manage the existing DERs. In the proposed algorithm, the
main input data consist of prices, efficiencies, forecasted power
generation of distributed energy resources and load. In other
words, the local controllers should keep the main controller of the
network informed of all data of existing local control centers to
minimize the operation cost of the system. Therefore, the proposed
structure is centralized. In Refs. [23], the authors have taken
advantage of a two-stage stochastic optimization to address the
operation planning of multi-carrier energy systems. In the pro-
posed architecture, a simple microgrid structure without consid-
ering the complicated function of control centers is used in
coordinating the microgrid and main grid. In Ref. [36], an isolated
MG providing the electricity and heating demands is considered.
The proposed structure cannot guarantee the efficiency of the
isolated microgrid in case of lack of electrical and heating energies.
Moreover, meta-heuristics algorithms are employed to optimize
the operation cost of the energy hub. Therefore, the optimal solu-
tion obtained by heuristic algorithms can be doubtful due to local
answers. Similarly, in Ref. [37], a single MG architecture is deployed
to provide the electrical and heating loads of the network. The
proposed energy management system is centralized, which means
that the microgrid operator has access to all data of network loads
and generation level of generators. Therefore, this type of frame-
work can be challenging even after a simple cyberattack, in which
some communication signals can be manipulated to mislead the
optimal scheduling of the microgrid. It should be noted that the
proposed heuristic algorithm may not be able to guarantee the
global minimum for the problem. In Ref. [3], there exists an energy
sharing between energy hubs. The proposed EMS is based on
centralized operation mode. Besides, the authors have utilized a
numerical method, called interior-point to overcome the conver-
gence of the proposed heuristic algorithm to a local minimum.
1.3. Contributions
In this paper, the energy hub concept is realized in a networked
MGs environment. As it was mentioned in the related works, all
studies have been carried out in a centralized operation mode of
energy management system. In other words, the EMS should have
access to data and information of all entities to fulfill an optimal
scheduling of the network. Therefore, the privacy of the entities are
not important in centralized EMS. Besides, the most works in en-
ergy hubs are studied either in regular distribution network
without presence of microgrids or a single microgrid structure in
islanded mode, while in this paper, a networked microgrids
structure is presented, inwhich all MGs are interconnected and can
share energy in a secure and safe environment with least data and
information sharing with distribution network operator.
According to the U.S. Department of Energy reports, microgrids
are the future of smart distribution grids. Additionally, according to
IEEE 1547 Standard, the interconnection and coordination of
distributed resources is critical to create the networked microgrids
structure [38]. Hence, the necessity of power systems studies in
networked microgrids is inevitable. In this paper, multiple energy
carriers networked microgrids is studied to satisfy various energy
demands of the customers. The interdependence of different en-
ergy infrastructures is an inevitable part of modern power systems.
In this regard, networked microgrids can provide a secure, efficient,
reliable, and resilient opportunity to various energy infrastructures
to satisfy the energy demands. Besides, the secured optimal coor-
dination between existing entities can guarantee the energy
preparation at any given time. Due to conventional structure of
distribution grids, providing energy is much more expensive than
networked microgrids framework. In networked microgrids, each
entity can connect to other entities to supply its energy re-
quirements in a distributed operation mode to guarantee the pri-
vacy and optimal energy trading, while in centralized mode or
conventional structures, the main network supervisor has to collect
all data from all existing entities and then optimize the energy
scheduling without considering the privacy of them. To sum up, the
networked microgrids as the future generation of distribution grids
can lead the power systems toward efficient and resilient energy
management, and in this regard, energy hubs concept can be
realized in this architecture considering the optimal operation of
natural gas and electricity infrastructures.
As the power and gas networks are interdependent, the optimal
energy trading between microgrids are inevitable. Compared to the
previous works in interconnected energy hubs, this paper proposes
a distributed method to manage the energy demands in a decen-
tralized operation mode. Therefore, the energy trading will flow
safely between entities, while in centralized mode the control
center of microgrids share all information and data with distribu-
tion network operator. To clarify the main contributions of this
paper, Table 1 is provided to list the most recent published papers
in the energy hub field, and compare the contributions with the
proposed paper.
In the proposed architecture, each MG has its objective function
including electricity, heating, and cooling demands, and each MG
coordinates its operation with the distribution network and other
MGs. Alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) is
employed to decentralize the daily operation of networked MGs
using a robust optimization method. Therefore, the main contri-
butions of this paper can be categorized as the following:
In this paper, networked microgrids are considered as multi-
energy hubs to satisfy various energy demands. The micro-
grids operate in an interconnected mode to realize the optimal
energy interaction among existing entities. Therefore, this study
exploits the multi-energy interconnection through a decen-
tralized operation mode of MGs, whereas previous studies have
focused more on electrical power interaction among MGs.
A new model is proposed to consider the energy interactions
among microgrids and distribution network. In this regard, a
decentralized energy management system is exploited to opti-
mally respect the ownership of all entities, while the private
information and security of them are realized.
The ADMM is introduced to ensure the privacy and indepen-
dence of the entities. The ADMM-based decentralized solution is
applied to interconnected operation mode of MGs and distri-
bution network to take the various energy interaction among
entities into account. According to the previous studies, the
ADMM model has been employed in those networks in which
only electricity is assumed to be provided.
A distributed robust model is applied to networked MGs
embedded energy hubs. The proposed robust ADMM model
tremendously decreases the computational burden and enjoys
higher convergence.
1.4. Organization
In section 2, the networked MGs structure for interconnected
energy hubs is presented. In section 3, the problem description is
described. In section 4, the distributed robust model of ADMM is
discussed. Finally, in section 5, the simulation results are depicted.
2. Networked microgrids description embedded energy hubs
In the proposed model, there exist two different decision-
makers. The first decision-maker has to do with distribution
network (DN). In this stage, distribution network operator mini-
mizes the cost of the system including generation cost, power
trading cost with the wholesale market, exchanging power cost
with microgrids, energy storage systems, and load interruption
costs considering wholesale market price and distributed energy
resources. The second decision makers are microgrids, in which
each microgrid is informed of the exchanging power of distribution
network with the MG through the existing communication links.
Then, each MG gathers data from the local controllers to optimize
its costs, and finally, the MG informs the distribution network of the
exchanging power between MG and distribution grid. Here, it will
be conflicts between MGs and distribution network in the amount
of exchanging power between the two identities, which this issue is
resolved by ADMM method. The structure of MGs and DN is
depicted as Fig. 1:
In this paper, a multi-carriers energy microgrids are considered
to satisfy the electricity and thermal loads. The proposed energy
hub model enables the sharing of different types of energy between
MGs and distribution network. In the presented model, there are
two entities: multi-microgrids and distribution network. The en-
tities in addition to generating energy through various energy
sources, can share different types of energy with each other to
address the energy demands of costumers. In Fig. 2, a typical
scheme of an EH can be shown.
3. Problem formulation
In this section, the deterministic-based objective function of
each entity is discussed separately.
3.1. Distribution network
As it is shown in Fig. 2, each entity includes two energy inputs to
address the different energy demands of the costumers. The
objective function of distribution network includes two different
parts: electricity, and heating costs. Therefore, the following
objective function can be utilized for distribution grid operation
cost:
The electricity part of distribution network objective function is
affected by electricity input of the energy hub. To supply the elec-
tricity demand of the EH, the objective function consists of elec-
tricity interaction of DN with MGs and wholesale (WS) market, and
charging/discharging state of batteries. Therefore, the electricity
interaction and charging/discharging, load interruption costs along
with the cost of provided electricity for electric chiller are included
in the objective function as following:
In aforementioned equations, the cost dealing with electricity
transaction is mentioned in (3), in which distribution network can
exchange electricity with wholesale market and microgrids. The
purchasing power increases the economic costs of the entity, while
distribution network can get profit through selling surplus elec-
tricity to the MGs and wholesale market. Similarly, battery bank
cost comprises the charging and discharging costs in (4). The
interruption cost is described in (5).
The electrical constraints of the problem for DNare as following:
In (6) and (7), the range of transacted electricity between dis-
tribution network and wholesale market is determined. Similarly,
the electricity interaction limit between distribution network and
each MG is specified in (8) and (9). The charging and discharging
constraints are described in (10) and (11).The constraints dealing
with generation units can be seen in (12)-(15). Finally, constraint
(16) describes the supply-demand balance of distribution network,
which should be guaranteed at any time slot.
It is worthwhile to be mentioned that the energy level of battery
storage system at any given time can be described as follows:
The second term of the proposed objective function for distri-
bution network has to do with gas-related cost. In addition to
electricity, existing EHs have gas input, in which the thermal and
cooling demands are supplied by gas network. Gas input provides
electricity, heating and cooling energies to the EHs. The output of
micro turbines, fuel cells, and diesel generator is electricity while
theyare supplied bygas network input. Besides, combined heat and
power (CHP) units canproduce heating energyas well as electricity,
and the input energy for CHP units is gas as well. Moreover, there
are several gas boilers inside each entity to supply the heating for
the thermal demands. According to the presented energy hub
structure, cooling demands of the entities can be supplied by both
electric chillers which has electricity input, and absorption chiller
which the input energy is gas. Therefore, the objective function
associated with gas energy input can be formulated as below:
In (18), all terms of objective function are shown. As micro
turbines (MTs), fuel cells (FCs), and CHPs are supplied by gas
network, the generation cost of these units is considered in gas
objective function. In this paper, it is assumed that all outputs of
MTs and FCs are electricity. In other words, according to (20) and
(21), the input gas energy is entirely converted to electricity. There
is a diesel generator in distribution network which its generation
cost is described by a quadratic function in (23). The cost dealing
with heating storage systems is shown in (24). In each EH, gas
boilers play an important role in supplying the thermal loads, and
the generated heat cost by gas boilers is formulated as (25). Each
energy hub can interact heating energy with gas network to
guarantee the supply-demand balance. The cost of the heating
transaction is formulated in (26). The heating interruption is
considered in case of lack of enough heating energy, which has the
cost as (27). On the other hand, CHP units have two energy outputs,
electrical energy and heating energy. Therefore, each output of the
CHP can be obtained as follows:
In (28), the electrical contribution of CHP is the value of total
energy output of the unit, while the heating portion of CHP is of the
total output energy in (29).
The heating-related inequality constraints of the problem for
distribution network are similar to electrical part. The inequality
constraints of heating section includes the generation limits of gas
boilers, charging and discharging state of heating storage, heating
energy trading of the entity with the external gas network, and
absorption chiller limits.
The supply-demand balance of heating hub is shown by (30).
3.2. Multi-microgrids
In this paper, each microgrid is considered as an EH which tries
to supply different type of energy demands in any given time.
Similar to distribution network, MGs can address the electricityand
thermal demands using local energy sources, energy storage sys-
tems, and energy interaction with upper level supplier. Microgrids
and distribution network are operating in decentralized mode
meaning that each entity optimizes its objective function without
interference of other entity. So, this operation mode greatly helps
the entities to protect the important data and information and
guarantee the security of them. Likewise, the distribution network,
MGs have to address the electricity and thermal loads at any time
slot.
The electricity part of each MG objective function is influenced
by electricity input of the energy hub. To supply the electricity
demand of each MG, dispatchable and dispatchable generation
units, electrical energy storage systems, and power transaction
between entities are considered. On the other hand, other output of
electricity hub is provided energy for electric chillers. The electrical
objective function of MGs is exactly like distribution network as
mentioned in (2). The costs dealing with electricity transaction,
electrical energy storage, and interruption are formulated like
distribution network (3-5). However, in case of transaction elec-
trical power of each MG, it should be noted that each MG has only
energy interaction with distribution network. Therefore, the elec-
trical power transaction of each MG can be defined as below:
Similar to distribution network inequality constraints, each MG
has the same constraints as (6)-(15). The equality balance of each
MG can be written as below:
The heating-related objective function of each MG is similar to
distribution network mentioned in (18)e(27).The equality heating
balance of each MG can be written as follows:
4. Distributed robust model based on ADMM
4.1. Robust approach
In this paper, the uncertainty dealing with wholesale market
price is modeled using robust optimization. The proposed objective
function can be described as follows:
The proposed objective function considering the robust model
can be formulated as below:
4.2. ADMM model
The prevalent form of objective function and constraint set
which is optimized by ADMM algorithm is as follows:
The augmented Lagrangian function associated with proposed
ADMM algorithm is as below:
As ADMM method is iterative approach, the corresponding it-
erations can be denoted as following:
As it is seen both x and z variables are separately minimized in
an iterative procedure. Therefore, according to (49) and (50), it can
be concluded that ADMM method is appropriate for decentralized
optimization problems. Due to iterative instinct of ADMM, the
approach should be stopped when the following convergence
criteria is fixed:
4.3. ADMM model for networked MGs embedded energy hubs
In this paper, microgrids and distribution network are consid-
ered as separate entities which are willing to interact with each
other from energy standpoint. It should be mentioned that variable
x consists of distribution network variables at any given time spot
as follows:
Similarly, the variable z includes the following variables for each
MG at any given time spot:
In this regard, the augmented Lagrangian function can be
formulated as (54):
As it was mentioned, microgrids and distribution network can
operate in decentralized mode, which means that the operation
cost can be minimized by each entity considering the energy in-
teractions. Considering the decentralized operation of entities,
ADMM is utilized to fix the conflicts of transacted electricity be-
tween each MG and distribution network. The steps of ADMM are
denoted as follows:
In Fig. 3, the flowchart of proposed decentralized model using
ADMM is depicted.
5. Numerical results
The ADMM method is tested in a distribution grid including
networkedmicrogrids with three MGs shownin Fig.1. Each MG and
distribution network operate as an EH which is shown in Fig. 2.
In Table 2 and Table 3, the performance parameters of devices
are listed. The hourly electrical, heating, and cooling demand of all
entities are depicted in Fig. 4.
In the distribution network, diesel generator, MT, FC, CHP,
photovoltaic panel (PV), and wind turbine (WT) are responsible to
provide electrical energy to the entity, while PV, WT, and CHP are
suppliers of electrical power for MG1, and MT, CHP, WT are in
charge of producing electricity for MG2. Besides, PV and CHP are
utilized in MG3 to supply the electricity. In Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, the
contribution of each power generation unit is shown. In Fig. 5, the
generation level of distribution network and MG1 is depicted. As it
can be observed the diesel generator is utilized when either the
generation level of wind turbine and PV panel is lower or the
electrical demand is higher especially in peak hours. Moreover, in
both distribution network and microgrids entities, the non-
dispatchable generation units including wind turbine and PV
panel have priority in power production. Then, the dispatchable
units are contributed to supply the required power. In other words,
the priorities for power generation are non-dispatchable, dis-
patchable, and diesel generators due to generation costs.
In addition to electrical sector, there exist different units which
are responsible to supply heating for consumers. Gas boilers and
CHP units are considered in heating generation process. The
contribution of gas boilers, CHP, and solar thermal units can be
observed in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 for the entities. It should be mentioned
that MG1 and MG3 can take advantage of solar thermal, as well.
Similar to electrical part, for the heating production, the solar
thermal units are the first priority of entities.
In Fig. 9, the contributions of cooling generation units can be
seen. Absorption chillers (AC) and electric chillers (EC) which are
supplied by gas and electricity, respectively, are utilized to supply
the cooling demand of MGs and distribution network.
Fig. 10 shows the transacted power between MGs and distri-
bution network. As it was mentioned in previous sections, the
ADMM approach is used to coordinate the electrical power inter-
action between entities in a decentralized operation mode. The
optimal results are achieved after 5 iteration which shows the fast
convergence of ADMM.
According to Fig. 10, it can be seen that MGs are willing to
purchase power from distribution network instead selling power to
that entity. It is due to this fact that the internal power generation
units are not able to supply electrical power to their customers.
Also, the Fig.10 describes that the MG2 provides more powers from
energy trading with distribution network compared to other
microgrids due to higher electrical demand of this microgrid. On
the other hand, it is seen that MG1 sells the surplus power to the
distribution network at hour 6 because of surplus generated power.
Totally, the cost of energy trading of MG2 should be more than
other entities.
In Fig.11, the optimal results of distribution network is depicted
for both electrical and heating sectors. Similarly, the optimal out-
puts of microgrids are shownin Figs.12e14. It should be mentioned
that the negative value for exchanged power describes that the
entity is willing to sell power to other entity.
In Fig. 11, In case of electrical operation, the generation level in
distribution network is depicted along with electrical demand. The
amount of energy trading of distribution network with wholesale
market, as well as other microgrids are depicted. In this regard, the
negative amount of energy trading with MGs describes the amount
energy selling to those entities. It is observed that the distribution
network is willing to sell more power to MG2 compared to other
microgrids. Besides, the charging and discharging level of batteries
are shown. From heating point of view, the heating energy gener-
ation using gas network is shown along with heating demand. In
Fig. 11, considering the heating demand, the distribution network
has to connect to external gas company to provide the required
heating energy to the clients. The negative amount of exchanged
heating means that the entity sells heating energy to the gas
company, while the amount of purchased heating energy is
described by positive numbers. It should be mentioned that in peak
hours, the entity requires to purchase energy rather than selling to
gas company. Also, the charging and discharging level of heating
storage systems are shown. Similarly, in Figs.12e14, the generation
level, energy trading, and state of charging are described for elec-
trical and heating purposes of all microgrids.
In Fig. 15, the optimal results for cooling goal of entities are
depicted.
As it is seen in Fig. 15, cooling load interruption can occur in
some hours, which is due to lack of input energy for both electric
chiller and absorption chiller. It is observed that the cooling load
shedding is prevalent in peak hours. It should be noted that cooling
interruption is directly depends on heating and electricity sections.
As an example, there is no cooling load interruption in MG3, which
means that either the load profile is lower or is there enough
electricity and heat in electric and heating hubs.
To analyze the operation cost of entities, Fig. 16 shows the total
operation cost of entities, which is the sum of electricity and gas
inputs. In this figure, the total operation cost is shown for robust-
ness level G 0 ¼ 12. It is seen that the operation cost of distribution
network is more than each microgrid because of higher electrical
and heating demands compared to other entities.
In Table 4, the total operation cost of distribution network is
described considering different robustness level.
As it was estimated, the operation cost increases with increasing
the robustness level. In other words, the system is more conser-
vative once the robustness level goes up. Therefore, when the
robustness level is getting twice, the operation cost of distribution
network increases by 19% which is a significant cost. Besides, to
compare the obtained results by the commercial package, a heu-
ristic algorithm, namely particle swarm optimization (PSO) is
employed to validate the optimal solution of proposed method. In
this paper, the obtained results are achieved and optimized by
commercial package (Gurobi optimizer package) and then
compared with PSO in centralized and distributed operation
modes. The achieved operation cost by Gurobi optimizer package is
reliable and optimal compared to PSO. The reason is that the
heuristic algorithms obtain local optimal solutions rather than
global answers.
To show the performance of ADMM, the operation cost of dis-
tribution network is depicted in Fig. 17 for each iteration at
robustness level 12.
According to Fig. 17, the fast convergence of ADMM can be seen
for the operation cost of distribution network. ADMM can reach to
the optimal cost after 5 iterations. Besides, In Fig. 18, the residual
value of problem which is described as step 4 of ADMM in (57) is
depicted. The rapid convergence of the method can be clearly seen.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, optimal operation of networked MGs embedded
interconnected energy hubs was discussed. A distributed robust
model was proposed to optimally coordinate the power trading
between microgrids and distribution network. A robust optimiza-
tion method is employed to analyze the impact of uncertainty
associated with wholesale market price. In this study, networked
MGs and distribution network were assumed to be independent
entities aiming at minimizing their own operation cost while the
privacy and security of entities are realized. To coordinate the
exchanged energy between MGs and distribution network, ADMM
is exploited to settle the conflicts of entities. The main goal of this
study was applying ADMM model to interconnected energy hubs to
show the strength of this distributed algorithm in coordinating the
existing conflict between entities. The achieved results proved this
fact that the convergence of ADMM model is significant and can
rapidly reach the optimal results in less iterations. Comparing the
obtained result by the proposed distributed algorithm with
centralized model shows the accuracy of the presented method.
Also, the optimality of proposed optimization method solved by
Gurobi solver is compared with a heuristic algorithm tovalidate the
accuracy. In the proposed problem, the obtained results by Gurobi
solver is better than heuristic algorithm. Distributionally robust
optimization model based on ADMM considering demand response
programs can be considered for optimal operation analysis of net-
worked MGs embedded EHs in future works.