Numerical analysis of flame stabilization for a steady premixed jet in vitiated coflow
Abstract
Premixed staged combustion in gas-turbine combustors, where a premixed fuel–air mixture is injected into a hot vitiated environment, has promise for better emission control. In these hot environments that occur at high engine pressure, the flames may stabilize by a combination of autoignition and premixed flame propagation. In this work, a laminar and steady premixed jet in vitiated coflow was studied numer￾ically to examine the stability behavior of such flames that are impacted by both autoignition and flame propagation. Simulations with detailed chemistry were used with boundary conditions matching previous experiments to understand the stability mechanisms. At the conditions studied, the laminar flame was lifted, with the region of highest heat release rates occurring downstream of the jet exit. However, non￾zero heat release rates an order-of-magnitude below the maximum value were observed continuously to the jet exit. An energy budget analysis was conducted along streamlines through different portions of the flame. Streamlines flowing through relatively low heat release rate regions near the burner exit were only influenced by mixing between the jet and vitiated coflow. Streamlines which flowed through higher heat release rates in the lifted flame were influenced by heat transfer from both the coflow and the existing flame, leading to heat-transfer assisted propagating premixed-flame behavior. Species budgets in the low- and high-heat release regions of the flames were also used to characterize autoigni￾tion locations. The species budget through autoignition regions showed clear markers such as high CH2O concentrations present ahead of high heat release rates. The streamlines through premixed propagation regions of the flame also had high CH2O concentrations upstream of the high heat release region, but the species budget shows this is due to mixing from autoignition regions as opposed to reactions occurring on the streamline ahead of the flame. Thus, caution must be taken when using CH2O as a marker for autoignition in such flames with mixed stabilization modes.
1. Introduction
Modern gas turbine engines are subject to increasing restric￾tions on pollutant emissions, which has led to design changes to either improve efficiency or separately reduce pollutant pro￾duction. Efficiency can be improved by increasing the pressure ratios, while additional pollutant reduction can be achieved by distributing the heat release such that high local temperatures are reduced . As one example, the Technology for Advanced Low NOx (TALON) combustor utilizes a rich swirl burner to provide a stable burning flame into which axially-staged air is in￾jected downstream to locally extinguish the rich flame and permit downstream burning under lean conditions. Pollutant emissions are lessened by transitioning from rich to lean conditions quickly with reduced high temperature heat release at stoichiometric conditions; however, the mixture must still pass through stoichio￾metric conditions briefly. Alternatively, the use of fully premixed staged combustion where premixed jets are injected into a flow of hot vitiated products can completely eliminate stoichiometric burning conditions. Safety has been a factor in avoiding premixed injection since this increases the potential for flashback. How￾ever, staged premixing has been demonstrated as in the Twin Annular Premixed Swirler (TAPS) combustor. Since the peak temperature can be controlled based on the equivalence ratio, pollutant emissions can be significantly reduced. When a premixed mixture is injected into a sufficiently hot environment, autoignition is a potential stabilization mechanism. However, the conditions for autoignition are complicated by non￾homogeneous fuel and temperature distributions. 
In an example non-reacting mixing layer , where the mixture fraction (Z) is defined as unity in the premixed injected reactants and zero in the vitiated products, there is a tradeoff between temperature (T) and mixture fraction. Nearer to the vitiated environment, where the mixture fraction is low, there are high temperatures that promote fast autoignition but low fuel concentrations that produce low amounts of total heat release. Closer to the premixed injection, where the mixture fraction is high and there is suffi- cient fuel and air for high heat release, the temperature is low, suggesting slow autoignition. This creates a challenging problem in determining locations where autoignition will provide overall flame stabilization when competing species and temperature gra￾dients are present in the mixture. This type of environment will be present in gas-turbine engines with premixed injection and is also present in reheat-style burners, which utilize hot combustion gas recirculation to stabilize the flame within a combustor. Prior numerical studies of non-premixed fuel jets injected into hot oxidizing environments found that autoignition occurred at the so-called ‘most reactive’ mixture fraction, defined as the mixture fraction with the shortest ignition delay time. The current paper examines a representative problem where a cold premixed jet is issued into a sufficiently hot vitiated coflow such that the mixture will autoignite.
Homogeneous autoignition studies typically examine specific fuel to air ratios at fixed temperatures where a defined ignition delay time is characterized. Higher temperatures and mix￾tures closer to stoichiometric conditions typically lead to shorter ignition delay times because the reaction rate exponentially in￾creases with temperature. In non-homogenous flows, where mix￾ing occurs between a jet containing fuel and a hot oxidizing coflow, a most reactive mixture fraction can be defined where there is a minimum ignition delay time based on homogeneous chemical kinetics. Most relevant work regarding autoignition in non￾homogeneous high temperature flows has been conducted with pure fuel jets issuing into a hot environment with a sufficient amount of residual oxygen such that combustion can take place. Due to the exponential dependence of the reaction rate on temperature, low mixture fractions often are the most reac￾tive mixture fraction. However, very little heat release occurs in these highly reactive regions because there is not much fuel present and may not produce stable burning conditions. In addi￾tion to autoignition, partially premixed propagation can also oc￾cur simultaneously with a lifted flame front propagating against the non-homogeneous fuel and air mixture . Since the result￾ing flame is lifted, mixing occurs upstream between the fuel and oxidizer environment that leads to an equivalence ratio gradient ahead of the flame base, which in non-premixed flames can lead to edge flame propagation. Many studies with fuel jets in￾jected into hot environments identified whether partially premixed propagation or autoignition was the dominant stabilization mech￾anism but did not address autoignition location or its local condi￾tions. Cabra et al. were among the first to study fueled-jet flame stability in vitiated flows in a laboratory setting. Although the measurements were inconclusive whether autoignition was the dominant stabilization mode, a direct numerical study (DNS) study using similar conditions as n confirmed that autoignition was occurring due to the production of preheating radical pools ahead of the flame base. Gordon et al. performed hydroxyl (OH) and formaldehyde (CH2O) planar laser induced fluorescence (PLIF) on similar conditions as in which radical pools of CH2O were found ahead of the primary burning region, followed by high OH production with low levels of CH2O in the flame. The observations of CH2O forming ahead of OH was consistent with autoignition nu￾merical simulations. Arndt et al. studied the transient process of a turbulent fuel jet injected into a vitiated coflow. High speed Rayleigh scattering was used to quantify the mixture fraction and temperature at the initiating kernel development. The leading au￾toignition kernel was found in regions of low scalar dissipation rate and mixture fraction, in agreement with chemical simulations of the most reactive mixture fraction. Unlike these prior studies with pure fuel injection, a premixed jet injected into vitiated products requires only heat to ignite the mixture and high mixture fractions retain a high heat release potential; thus different conditions for autoignition are expected in comparison to a pure fuel jet. Premixed jets in hot coflow and crossflows are relevant to future gas-turbine engine design but have been studied only recently. Schmitt et al. ex￾amined a premixed jet injected into vitiated crossflow and found that the jet immediately ignited upon entering the test section. They attributed this to a horseshoe vortex penetrating into the jet, which ignited inside the jet tube itself. Wagner et al. studied similar conditions that instead led to lifted and unsteady flames where the flame was found to be autoignition assisted. Later work used simultaneous particle image velocimetry (PIV) with OH and CH2O PLIF and found three burning regimes. In one of the regimes, CH2O was found to be produced well upstream of the OH flame base, similar to [19] where a radical buildup occurred ahead of the reaction zone, suggesting that autoignition was important in the flame stabilization behavior. Although there have been many observations of autoignition type behavior in such flames, a thorough understanding of how autoignition and premixed flame propagation each contribute to stabilization in these flames is challenged by unsteady flame propagation in turbulent flows. The present work aims to better identify autoignition and understand the processes which transition from autoignition to that of a premixed flame in these non-homogeneous conditions by study￾ing a laminar steady flame. Previous related experimental work studied a laminar and steady premixed jet in vitiated coflow and found autoignition characteristics ahead of the high heat release lifted flame base. The current paper serves as an extension which uses numerical simulations to calculate the solution of a similar geometry with comparable boundary conditions to better understand details related to the stabilization of this flame and the competition between autoignition and flame propagation. Although the conditions used in this work are at lower pressure and velocity than engine applications, the fundamental understanding from these simplified conditions helps understand how flames stabilize in conditions where autoignition and partially premixed flame propagation both contribute. The understanding from this work can be applied to more complicated conditions and flowfields.
2. Numerical setup
2.1. Burner design
The jet in coflow burner used for this study is shown , which replicates the geometry from previous experimental work. The burner consists of two coannular nozzles where the outer nozzle provides vitiated products, while the inner nozzle provides room-temperature premixed reactants. In the experiment, sepa￾rate (jet and coflow) fresh reactants are supplied to the bottom of an enclosed burner. The coflow reactants flow through a flame arrestor that stabilizes a flame and provides the coflow vitiated products. The coflow products flow through a ceramic converg￾ing nozzle to create a uniform exit flowfield. The experimental burner is equipped with a 3.8 mm inner diameter jet which flows straight through a 50 mm diameter outer nozzle. The gas exiting the burner flows into room-air conditions at 1 atm. This geom￾etry was replicated in the computational domain with an addi￾tional 100 mm low velocity (1 cm/s) air jet to simulate surround￾ing quiescent air. The computational domain extended 150 mm inthe axial direction, which should fully encompass the lifted flame since the flames from were lifted approximately 10 mm. To simplify the interpretation of the results, the wall between the jet and coflow that existed in the experiments was simulated as a knife edge to eliminate any recirculation zone downstream of the jet wall. All experimental cases from [42] produced a laminar and steady lifted flame, leading to two-dimensional axial symme￾try. The computational domain origin is located at the jet center atthe nozzle exit plane. 
Although several boundary conditions were examined in, a specific case was chosen for the detailed numerical study here.The jet was modeled as an ethylene-air mixture with an equiv￾alence ratio of 0.75 at 300 K. The coflow was modeled by cal￾culating the chemical equilibrium state of a 0.7 equivalence ratiopropane-air mixture, which underwent heat loss to bring the tem￾perature down to 1500 K, for consistency with. Both the jetand coflow were simulated with a plug-flow 5 m/s velocity pro-file. Simulations of the temperature, heat release rate, and mixture fields for this case are shown in Fig. 3. The Reynolds num￾ber for the jet and coflow were 1210 and 1060, respectively, based on the gas velocity, jet or coflow diameter and the local viscosity. All experiments and simulations were performed at atmospheric conditions.
2.2. Numerical scheme
The left edge of the computational domain was modeled as an axis of symmetry while the top and right edges were modeled as pressure outlets. The individual species concentrations and tem￾peratures were input at the coflow exit as well as both pressure outlets to model backflow conditions. The mesh had a uniform 100 μm resolution in the axial direction. The resolution varied in the radial direction. At radial locations between the centerline and 2.5 mm, the resolution was 50 μm to ensure high resolution of the mixing layer. The grid spacing beyond 2.5 mm in the radial direction monotonically increased to 100 μm resolution, and re￾mained constant until reaching a radial distance of 5 mm. Radial locations exceeding 5 mm monotonically increased again, reaching a maximum grid spacing of 8 mm in the ambient air region of the computational domain, to reduce the computational cost. The flame thickness, using the initial conditions of the jet, was esti￾mated to be 600 μm using Cantera. 
The UNsteady Ignition and COmbustion with ReactioNs (UNI￾CORN) [44–46] solver was used in this work. This code solved the Navier–Stokes, energy, and species conservation equations in cylin￾drical coordinates. The equations were solved by integrating the governing equations on a staggered grid. The momentum equa￾tions were solved using the third-order accurate QUICKEST scheme while the energy and species equations were solved using a hy￾brid upwind and central differencing scheme. Additional details are available in [44]. The Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) number was set to 0.5 to avoid numerical instabilities. The steady-state solu￾tion was obtained by iterating each time-dependent solution until residuals reached a constant value of close to machine precision. Time steps were taken until steady state was reached. The San￾Diego mechanism was used to model the ethylene-air com￾bustion chemistry, which uses 52 species and 272 reactions.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. General observations
The heat release was calculated by multiplying the reaction rates and enthalpy of combustion for each individual reaction. The heat production from each reaction was summed . The bottom edge of the computational domain from 0 to 1.9 mm in the radial direction is the jet exit and the hot coflow exists beyond 1.9 mm. Both the jet and coflow are flowing in the positive axial direction with the same velocity magnitude. Streamlines passing through the flame have local peaks in heat release rate that are at high axial loca￾tions for streamlines originating near the centerline where little mixing occurs with the coflow. For streamlines originating near the coflow, significant mixing with burned coflow products decreases the peak heat release rate on that streamline. The dotted black line follows the local maximum heat release at each axial height. The solid lines are streamlines which intersect the maxi￾mum heat release line at the location of 15%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 90% of the global maximum heat release rate. These streamlines are equivalent to the streamlines that intersect the lowest point on a given heat release isocontour. The streamlines were chosen to reflect changes in the flame stability as demonstrated further throughout this paper. Percentages of the maximum heat release rate are used to define the streamline locations for generality. The maximum heat release rate occurred near a = 20, where the flame seemingly acts as a premixed flame. Locations on the flame closer to the jet exit have lower heat release rate, due to smaller fuel concentrations as indicated in the mixture fraction contour plot. Although non-zero heat release rates exist at all axial heights, for low heights the magnitude is an order of magnitude or more below the peak heat release rate. The 15% of maximum heat release contour is lifted a few mm above the jet exit and 90% heat release contour begins approximately 14 mm above the jet exit in the axial direction, as observed in Fig. 3. Beyond 14 mm the flame nearly acts as a premixed flame, maintaining a nearly con￾stant Bunsen angle and approximately constant heat release mag￾nitude. The flame stabilization region is proposed to extend be￾tween 3.5 and 7.5 mm in the axial direction, as supported by the detailed analysis in this paper, and including the regions with ap￾proximately 15–50% of the maximum heat release rate. Upstream of the 15% maximum heat release contour, there is still heat being released all the way to the burner exit, although, it is small when compared to the heat released from the down￾stream region. Therefore, this inherently brings up questions for these flames: at what point does this flame begin, where is it stabilized, and what is the stabilization mechanism? Observations from show the flame visually lifted,  if the flame is defined as regions with a large heat release rate magnitude. However, since there is on the order of 108 W/m3 of heat being produced near the jet exit, is this flame lifted or at￾tached? One distinguishing feature is that the low heat release rate near the burner exit likely cannot be sustained without the pres￾ence of the coflow providing suitable heat transfer, whereas the downstream premixed flame provides sufficient feedback of heat and species to the incoming jet reactants to allow the mixture to continuously ignite like a normal propagating premixed flame. A key question addressed in this research is therefore: where does the flame transition from being supported by the coflow to being supported by only the existing premixed flame and what is the role of autoignition in that transition? Temperature profiles along the same streamlines that are plot￾ted in Fig. 4 are shown in Fig. 5. Since the 15% heat release stream￾line originates in the coflow, the temperature starts at 1500 K, ini￾tially decreases as it mixes with the cooler jet fluid and increases as reactions take place. All other streamlines originate from the jet, begin at 300 K and essentially linearly increase in temperature prior to rapidly rising in temperature. The regime where the tem￾perature linearly increases is dominated by diffusive heat exchange between the two interacting flows (shown subsequently). The sub￾sequent rapid rise in temperature occurs near the flame reaction layer, implying diffusion from the flame front or reactions are heat￾ing the flow in this region. The sample streamline which passes through 15% of the maximum heat release approaches a minimum temperature around 1200 K before increasing. Prior to this, close to the jet exit, there is a decrease in temperature as the fluid parcel mixes with cold jet fluid. The subsequent increase in temperature is gradual, unlike a strongly burning premixed flame. Streamlines with greater heat release maxima have much lower temperatures prior to a quick rise in temperature that is more indicative of a propagating premixed flame. Therefore, it is unlikely that the plot￾ted streamlines which pass through 50% of the maximum heat re￾lease or greater autoignite since they do not reach suitable temper￾atures prior to a quick rise in temperature. Conversely, the lower heat release streamlines are not consistent with flame propagation since they do not have a rapid rise in temperature at a flame front. One goal of better understanding this type of autoignition￾assisted flame is the ability to predict the liftoff height, as it will impact the locations of flame stabilization in practical combus￾tors. Several studies have observed that the flow time to the sta￾bilization region for premixed jets in vitiated environments was much longer than the ignition delay time from autoignition cal￾culations of the most reactive mixture fraction. The difference in flow time to the stabilization point and the au￾toignition time for the most reactive mixture fraction was approxi￾mately an order of magnitude. To further examine this discrepancy, zero-dimensional chemical-kinetic simulations were performed us￾ing Cantera and the San-Diego mechanism , consistent with the mechanism used in UNICORN, to characterize the igni￾tion delay time for select homogeneous. The calculation sequence is depicted in Fig. 6, which represents infinitely fast mix￾ing of jet and coflow fluid to a defined mixture composition fol￾lowed by reactions without further mixing, similar to prior calcu￾lations of autoignition times for the most reactive mixture fraction. The coflow mixture composition was determined by calcu￾lating the chemical equilibrium state of the coflow inlet boundary conditions with an imposed temperature that matches the exper￾imental value from. The jet fluid composition was set based on the known jet equivalence ratio. The jet and coflow composi￾tions were adiabatically mixed defined by Z, given in Eq. (1). In Eq. (1), mJ is the mass of premixed jet fluid and mCo is the mass of coflow fluid in the mixture. Chemical kinetic simulations were performed for Z values ranging from 0 to 1 to examine the reac￾tions taking place from mixtures originating from the coflow to jet, res ectively. These mixtures were then simulated in a plug flow re￾actor (PFR) where a time marching scheme was used to compute the time evolution of the reacting fluid. The ignition delay time was defined based on the time to reach the maximum heat release.It shows the autoignition times for these ideal condi￾tions with Z values ranging from 0.1 to 0.4. Mixtures greater than Z = 0.4 did not autoignite, and therefore were not shown. These were compared to flow times from the full 2-D UNICORN simu￾lation of the flame. The flow times are computed by defining the reaction layer as the 108 W/m3 heat release isocontour and com￾puting the residence time from the exit of the burner to this con￾tour for different streamlines. The mixture fraction for that stream￾line was calculated using a mass weighted average of the normal￾ized elemental mass fractions at the point where this streamline intersects the heat release isocontour. These flow time values are compared against the 0-D autoignition time scales i. The 0-D simulations show the homogenous ignition delay time for Z less than 0.2 is approximately 100 μs or less, which leases a larger amount of heat, but requires a longer ignition de￾lay time. Therefore, the actual stabilization point in the experiment and simulation with gradients in Z is impacted by this trade off. In the 2-D simulation for low mixture fractions, the flow time to the flame is approximately 250 μs and is longer than the most reac￾tive mixture fraction delay time from the 0-D simulations. The flow time is much flatter with respect to mixture fraction than the auto￾ignition time from the 0-D simulations. However, once autoignition occurs and the flame is stabilized at some location, downstream lo￾cations within the premixed jet can propagate as premixed flames as apparent . It suggests that stabilization can be viewed as occurring at the intersection of the two lines where the time scale for au￾toignition of the mixture matches the residence time along the streamline, but this ignores effects of cross-stream mixing. The ef￾fects of cross-stream mixing can be clearly observed from the 15% heat release streamline. The streamline originates in the coflow and therefore needs time to mix with the jet to obtain fuel. Thus, the non-homogenous mixing effects may play an important role in elongating the overall ignition delay time.
3.2. Energy equation analysis
A more thorough analysis of this flame was conducted from the full 2-D simulations using the energy budget to determine the rel￾ative contribution of each energy term along various streamlines. This is similar to the analysis conducted in. The steady-state energy equation is given in Eq. (2) in cylindrical coordinates, where ρ is the density, cp is the specific heat capacity at constant pres￾sure, Vr is the radial velocity, T is the temperature, Va is the axial velocity, λ is the thermal conductivity, Ji is the flux of mass dif￾fusion, ω˙ i is the reaction rate of the i th reaction, this is the en￾thalpy of combustion for the ith reaction, and r and a are the ra￾dial and axial directions, respectively. The energy budget along a streamline can help understand the physical processes for a fluid particle approaching the flame. The energy balance in Eq. (2) can be transformed into the local normal and tangential components along the streamline, shown in Eq. (3), where η is the normal di￾rection and τ is the tangential direction. In the calculations τ was defined as positive in the direction of the flow and η was rotated by negative 90°. Therefore, at the jet exit the tangential compo￾nent is in the positive axial direction and the normal component is in the positive radial direction, which points towards the coflow. The λ/r term and the enthalpy transport by species diffusion term, Ji , are negligible as verified in the full calculations and were neglected in Eq. (3). Also, since there is no flow normal to the streamline, the normal advective heat flux component is zero. The energy budget which passes through the 90% heat release contour is shown. Far upstream of the reaction layer there is no energy transport in this isothermal region of the flow. How￾ever, in the nearfield of the reaction layer, the fluid element is dif￾fusively heated by the downstream reaction layer and is balanced by the advective heat flux. Upon reaching the reaction layer the fluid is heated by the chemical heat release and the diffusive term becomes negative representing a loss to upstream fluids elements. The energy budget along this streamline resembles a typical pre￾mixed flame.  
It also shows diffusion in the normal direction (across streamlines). Unlike a planar premixed flame, the diffusive term is dominated by the normal component with only a small amount from the component along the streamline. Therefore, the fluid is pre-heated by neighboring streamlines which originate closer to the coflow and have already reacted. From Figs. 3 and 4, it can be seen that the streamlines enter the premixed flame at an an￾gle, which leads to this dominant diffusion in the cross-stream direction. This is similar to a classic angled Bunsen flame. Anal￾ysis of the energy budget in coordinates aligned with the flame surface was also conducted (not shown). These results show the same overall balance between diffusive and reactive transport at the flame, but the presented streamline coordinates provide addi￾tional clarity for other regions of this flame with stronger advective flux. The energy budget for the streamline crossing the 50% of max￾imum heat release is shown. Far upstream of the reaction layer, the mixture is diffusively heated normal to the streamline. The heat gain is nearly constant and is balanced by the tangen￾tial advective heat flux, for similar reasons as in It. In the re￾gion where the diffusive heating is nearly constant, It shows the temperature increasing almost linearly. An increase in diffusive heating occurs close to the reaction layer, which is due to the high temperature reaction layer, similar to the 90% streamline. The ax￾ial locations where the diffusive heating increases correspond to the locations with a rapid temperature rise. Therefore, the fluid along this streamline is still aided by the diffusive heating from the flame. The flame, however, contributed significantly less heat than in the 90% streamline. Instead, preheating by the coflowupstream of the reaction layer aided in allowing the streamline to reach temperatures necessary for reactions. Therefore, this region
could be classified as a premixed flame aided by preheating from the hot coflow. The 50% of the maximum heat release streamline clearly has an influence from both the flame and from diffusive heating from the coflow, but the relative influences are not quantitatively clear just from Fig. 9. Two types of diffusive heat transfer are expected to contribute for the given flame configuration: diffusive heat gain from the high temperature coflow, and heat transfer from the sta￾bilized downstream flame. While the energy budget can quantify the total heat gain from diffusion, it does not differentiate be￾tween the two types of diffusive heat transfer. In order to re￾solve this, a post-processing calculation of the same flow without reactions was conducted. This calculation was performed by re￾solving the energy equation by removing heat release and species enthalpy transport terms but using the local diffusive and spe￾cific heat properties, and local velocities from the full simulation with reactions. Thus, only the energy equation is re-solved and the resulting analysis of this temperature field compared to the full field with reactions quantitatively separates the effects of diffu￾sive heat flux from the coflow while neglecting diffusive heat flux from the flame. The calculation was performed by importing rel￾evant flow properties from the full 2-D simulation into MATLAB and solving a non-reacting energy equation for the balance be￾tween diffusive and advective heat fluxes with the velocity and transport properties imposed from the full simulation. The calcu￾lation used the Gauss-Seidel iteration scheme with successive un￾der relaxation. A non-reacting test case was simulated in UNI￾CORN and compared to the results from this numerical procedure. Maximum temperature differences were approximately 30 K, and maximum diffusive heat fluxes differences were 107 W/m3. Since the diffusive heat flux in the reacting simulations are on the or￾der of 109 W/m3 , this accuracy should be sufficient to resolve the diffusive heat flux contributions from the flame and coflow. The discrepancies from resolving the temperature were attributed to interpolating the simulation parameters, differences in spatial dis￾cretization, and differences in numerical procedures. The temper￾ature that was calculated using this method will be referred to as the non-reacting temperature field throughout the remainder of this section.
It shows the resulting energy budget, which has been further broken into normal diffusive heat fluxes from the coflow and flame. The heat flux from the non-reacting calculation is shown as the dotted line, which corresponds to the heat flux contribution from the coflow via diffusion only, and the dashed￾dotted line is the difference in the diffusive heat flux from the reacting case and the non-reacting case. Thus, at low axial posi￾tions the diffusive heating is dominated by mixing between the
jet and coflow, as expected. At approximately 5 mm the diffu￾sive heat flux from the flame begins to make a contribution to the overall heat flux, and by 6 mm is dominating the diffusive heating. The energy budget for a streamline which passes through 15% of the maximum heat release rate is shown. Unlike the 50% streamline, this streamline begins in the coflow and is diffu￾sively cooled by mixing with the jet, thus the results indicate a negative (heat loss) diffusive flux from the coflow after computing the non-reacting temperature field. The diffusive heat loss at lo￾cations close to the jet exit (a ~ 0.5 mm) have high loss rates in comparison to the heat gain along the 50% streamline. The diffusive heat flux magnitude decays with axial height as the temperature gradient is reduced by mixing. Heat release exists at all heights on the streamline but peaks at 4 mm. The structure of this heat release is significantly different than that shown along the 50% streamline. In that, the diffusive flux from the flame preheats the incoming flow leading to a rapid increase in the heat release rate; consistent with a propagating premixed flame structure. In Fig. 11, the diffusive heating from the flame is never positive along the streamline, implying that the heat gen￾eration along this streamline is lost to neighboring streamlines by diffusion. Therefore, the fluid along this particular streamline is not aided by heat transfer from the heat release region. Instead, this streamline is diffusively cooled by mixing with the jet, resulting in an increased fuel concentration prior to spontaneous heat release. This streamline is representative of an autoigniting mixture since the fluid element requires no heat from an existing flame to spon￾taneously react and gains the necessary conditions for heat release from mixing between the vitiated coflow and premixed fuel and air jet.
Observations concerning the provided streamline energy bud￾gets support the following understanding for the stability of this flame. Streamlines originating close to the vitiated coflow passing through less than 15% of the maximum heat release rate, have a net loss of heat to the jet fluid via diffusion. These locations ac￾quire fuel and air from the jet and are at sufficiently high tem￾peratures to produce significant heat release. However, these lo￾cations have a net heat loss to the flame itself, and further, are not expected to be self-sustaining since the high temperatures can only be attributed to the high initial temperature of the coflow. Streamlines between the 15% and 50% maximum heat release con￾tours transition to conditions that are preheated by the coflow but are also preheated by the flame initiated between the jet and coflow fluid. Transitioning from the 50% to 90% maximum heat release streamlines, the fluid elements feel less of an effect
from the coflow and are heated primarily by the presence of the flame behaving like a propagating premixed flame. Near the 90% maximum heat release streamlines and beyond, the fluid is only heated by the flame, and has nearly no direct interaction with the coflow. The progress variable was also computed and is overlaid on Figs. 8–11 to indicate the extent of burning in the different regimes. The progress variable was determined by computing the adiabatic flame temperature at each specific location and normal￾izing this temperature from zero to unity, where zero is 300 K and unity is the local adiabatic flame temperature.
The streamlines used thus far are exam
ples to identify differ￾ent burning behaviors. These behaviors can be further defined to identify the boundaries between the three burning regimes. The identifying feature of pure autoignition behavior in Fig. 11 was that ∂ lame < 0, that is the fluid received no positive heat transfer from the downstream flame. Therefore, autoignition burn￾ing is defined here when ∂  lame < 0. The term ∂∂η (λTη)f lame was sampled along the reaction layer until determining that the diffusive heating from the flame became positive. The transition between autoignition and heat-transfer assisted propagation using this definition was determined to occur approximately at the 15% maximum heat release streamline. The transition between heat￾transfer assisted propagation and fully premixed flame propagation can be determined by defining a parameter, ζ , which describes the heat a fluid parcel accumulates along a streamline. Its com￾ponents, ζ flame and ζ coflow, are defined as lameds and lowds, respectively, where s is the distance along the streamline. For streamlines originating near the centerline, where there is no heat transfer from the coflow, ζ flame will reach an upper limit while ζ coflow will be nearly zero. The remaining flow field can be normalized by the maximum ζ flame value to determine the rel￾ative heat transfer contribution from the flame. Figure 12(a) shows ζ flame along with the 15% and 85% streamlines. ζ flame and ζ coflow were sampled along the maximum heat release contour, indicated by the dashed line in Fig. 12(a), and are shown in Fig. 12(b). This plot shows the heat that was accumulated for the two compo￾nents of diffusive heat flux along the streamline prior to the region of largest heat release. Comparing ζ flame and ζ coflow at these loca￾tions shows the relative contribution each had on heating the fluid parcel to reacting temperatures. The normalized ζ flame, shown in that, approaches unity near a = 14 mm, which corresponds to ~85% of maximum heat release. In addition, near 14 mm ζ flame is approximately two orders of magnitude greater than ζ coflow, im￾plying that the coflow had a minimal influence in heating the fluid along this streamline. Thus, the transition from heated propagation to fully premixed propagation occurs at approximately 85% of the maximum heat release streamline, using the definition provided above. This analysis could be extended to unsteady and turbulent simulations by solving one additional equation that determines the effective non-reacting heat transfer from the flame. For large simu￾lations that cannot store sufficient information for post processing, analysis of cumulative heat transfer would need to be done in a Lagrangian manner by tracking fluid parcels at select locations dur￾ing the simulation. This would be analogous to the current stream￾line analysis since this flow is steady. Extension of this analysis to experimental measurements would be limited given the need to resolve 3D advective fluxes, which can be extracted from velocity measurements and diffuse fluxes. Chemical explosive modal analysis (CEMA) was also inves￾tigated to determine the notable similarities and differences to the energy analysis. The largest eigenvalue of the chemical Jacobian matrix was calculated at each grid point as shown. The presence of chemical explosive modes (CEM) are indicated when the eigenvalue is large. Streamlines that pass through high heat release rates have low eigenvalues at low axial heights except near
the reaction layer, shown in Fig. 13(b). This indicates little propen￾sity to ignite until reaching the reaction layer, similar to that seen in standard premixed flames. Streamlines that pass through low heat release rates, for instance the 15% of maximum heat re￾lease rate, have high eigenvalues at low axial positions prior to reaching the peak heat release region. This behavior is similar to that under autoignition conditions. Interestingly, the 50% max￾imum heat release streamline shows very similar behavior as the 90% case. This indicates that although there is significant preheat￾ing prior to reacting, the chemical propensity to ignition is low, in agreement with the energy analysis performed and supporting the interpretation of this region of the flame as heat-transfer assisted premixed flame propagation.
Flame speeds were calculated in the different regimes by sam￾pling the velocity upstream of the reaction zone and determining the normal component with respect to the flame. Interestingly, the heat-transfer assisted regime exceeded the flame speed in the fully premixed regime. Although the heat release rate and fuel concen￾tration were lower in the heat-transfer assisted regime, the tem￾perature was also higher, as seen in Fig. 5, which led to 50% higher propagation speeds. While the flame speed is higher, the total ac￾cumulated heat release in the heat transfer assisted regime was 36.1% of the entire heat release, as compared to 59.4% for the fully premixed regime. Moreover, the autoignition regime contributed 4.5% to the total heat release, indicating that this regime does not add much heat to the entire flowfield but aids in stabilizing the flame. One other question to explore with this simulation addresses the difference in autoignition delay time from zero-dimensional chemical kinetic simulations, and the flow times corresponding to the lift off height of this flame and similar flames from the literature. The energy analysis here shows a key characteristic along the streamlines which is different than the PFR calculations. Since the fluid element is continually mixing between the jet and coflow, there are differences in the fluid state compared to the PFR calculations, which are adiabatic and non-mixing. The autoignition region of this flame has a net heat loss to other regions of the flow, thus, early heat release and radical formation is depleted by diffusion, which results in an additional delay in the autoignition time. The ignition delay times from the PFR calculations do not capture this mixing between regions leading to the discrepancy in the au￾toignition and flow times.
3.3. Species analysis
CH2O and OH have been important experimental markers for identifying autoignition and heat release characteristics. Mass fractions of OH and CH2O are shown in Fig. 14 with similar streamline and local maximum heat release line as in Fig. 4. Axial heights at approximately 8 mm and above show consistencies with
premixed flame-type behavior. Above 8 mm, CH2O is produced in the preheat region near the flame and quickly consumed, where large concentrations of OH are present in the reaction layer and post-combustion region. Therefore, this region is consistent with premixed flame behavior and shows little influence of transport from the coflow, consistent with Fig. 8. Streamlines ahead of the reaction layer have negligible influence from the coflow and pro￾duce negligible amounts of preheat radicals upstream of the pre￾heat layer, also consistent with premixed flame behavior. Axial heights less than 8 mm show significantly different be￾havior. OH is produced in smaller concentrations upon passing through the flame, indicating smaller fuel concentrations and over￾all heat release than in the premixed flame region. CH2O on the other hand is produced in higher concentrations, and approaches peak values at an axial position as low as approximately 6 mm. Since CH2O is present in the preheat region, there is a significantly elongated preheating region ahead of the flame in the streamwise direction. High CH2O formation far ahead of the flame is often used to indicate autoignition locations [19], and is consistent with Fig. 11. Similar to Section 3.2, a species budget can be analyzed along different streamlines. Eq. (4) shows the species budget, where Dim is the species diffusion coefficient between species i and m, where m is nitrogen for the purposes of this analysis, and Yi is the mass fraction of species i. Fig. 15 shows the species budget and CH2O mass fraction along the 15% maximum heat release streamline. As indicated earlier, the 15% maximum heat release streamline is a streamline which undergoes pure autoignition behavior (no posi￾tive heat flux from the flame). In Fig. 15, the mass fraction of CH2O increases quickly within the first 0.5 mm. Moreover, the rise in CH2O concentration is due to local production which is balanced by diffusion and advection. Observations from Fig. 11 show that relatively high heat release rates associated with the reaction layer begins around 2.5 mm. The high concentration of CH2O due toreactions occurring far upstream of the high heat release rates is consistent with this streamline being autoignition dominated. A similar analysis was conducted on the streamline which passes through 50% of the maximum heat release and is shown in Fig. 16. Similar to the 15% streamline, there is significant CH2O concentration upstream of the high heat release region. How￾ever, observations from Fig. 10 showed that this streamline is not an autoignition dominated streamline. Upon further inspection of Fig. 16 there is a balance between diffusion and advection which increases the CH2O concentration upstream of the reaction layer. Nearing the reaction layer, there is a large increase in CH2O con￾centration due to reactions which are subsequently consumed. The lack of CH2O production upstream of reactions indicates that the CH2O concentration upstream of the reaction layer is only present due to transport from neighboring streamlines. The use of CH2O as an indicator for autoignition events therefore can be mislead￾ing in such non-homogeneous mixtures since CH2O is not only present due to reactions but also can be transported from adja￾cent autoignition regions. Thus, caution must be taken when using CH2O PLIF measurements to identify autoignition regions upstream of the flame.
4. Summary and conclusions
A premixed jet in vitiated coflow was simulated to better un￾derstand autoignition stabilized flame behavior. Spatial locations of hof high heat release rates indicate a lifted flame, in agreement with the corresponding experimental flame which is visually lifted. Conversely, low heat release rates on the order of 108 W/m3 were observed immediately at the jet exit and monotonically in￾creased into the flame. Ignition delay times from homogenous and adiabatic chemical kinetic simulations were compared to flow times to reach the flame in the full 2-D numerical simulation of the flame. The flow times to the reaction layer were larger than the homogenous ignition delay time, indicating that these homo￾geneous simulations are insufficient in describing the location of flame stabilization. Analysis of terms in the energy equation show that streamlines passing through high heat release rates had similar behavior as typical premixed flames. However, streamlines which pass through intermediate heat release rate regions showed effects of preheat￾ing from the coflow upstream of the flame, indicating heat-transfer assisted-premixed flame propagation. At relatively low heat release rates, the streamlines were dominated by heat release from au￾toignition and net heat loss via mixing to other regions in the flow. Transition points were identified between these regions to char￾acterize the locations of autoignition, autoignition assisted flame propagation and premixed flame propagation. Analysis of species transport were consistent with these tran￾sitions. In the premixed flame region, CH2O was produced only in the preheat region of the flame and quickly consumed in the reaction layer. The CH2O budget along an autoignition streamline showed high CH2O concentrations far upstream of the highest heat release rate, consistent with radical pool buildup in autoignition. However, the streamlines which were identified as autoignition￾assisted flame propagation had relatively high CH2O concentrations upstream of the flame, suggesting autoignition, but this was due to transport from neighboring streamlines as opposed to local pro￾duction. Therefore, caution needs to be taken when using CH2O concentration as an indicator for autoignition.
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan￾cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
This material is based upon work supported by the Kentucky Science and Engineering Foundation under Grant No. # KSEF-148- 502-17-411. The authors acknowledge Dr. Vish Katta for modifying UNICORN to accommodate these simulations.

