A numerical model for transport in ﬂat heat pipes considering wick microstructure effects

Abstract:
A transient, three-dimensional model for thermal transport in heat pipes and vapor chambers is developed. The Navier–Stokes equations along with the energy equation are solved numerically for the liquid and vapor ﬂows. A porous medium formulation is used for the wick region. Evaporation and condensation at the liquid–vapor interface are modeled using kinetic theory. The inﬂuence of the wick microstructure on evaporation and condensation mass ﬂuxes at the liquid–vapor interface is accounted for by integrating a microstructure-level evaporation model (micromodel) with the device-level model (macromodel). Meniscus curvature at every location along the wick is calculated as a result of this coupling. The model accounts for the change in interfacial area in the wick pore, thin-ﬁlm evaporation, and Marangoni convection effects during phase change at the liquid–vapor interface. The coupled model is used to predict the performance of a heat pipe with a screen-mesh wick, and the implications of the coupling employed are discussed.

1.Introduction:
Miniature heat pipes and vapor chambers effectively spread and carry heat from a heat-dissipating microelectronic chip to a remote location where air-cooling techniques may be deployed. These passive cooling devices transfer heat across a low temperature differential so that a safe working temperature for the chip can be maintained. As the size of electronic components continues to de-crease with a simultaneous increase in heat dissipation ﬂuxes, it is becoming increasingly necessary to optimize the shape and design of the heat spreaders for more efﬁcient thermal management. The maximum liquid feeding ﬂow rate that can be supported in a heat pipe wick due to capillary pressure (the capillary limit) restricts the maximum heat input that can be supported without causing dry-out. Improved heat pipe performance requires wick structures with superior wicking ability as well as enhanced thin-ﬁlm evaporation characteristics. In recent work, the authors [1,2] studied the wicking and evaporation characteristics of various microstructures to be used in heat pipes and concluded that sintered powder wicks have the best performance characteristics among those considered. However, models which predict the effects of various microstructures on the heat transfer performance of heat pipes have not, to our knowledge, been employed widely and are the focus of the present work.
Many numerical and analytical models have been developed to study the operation of heat pipes. Garimella and Sobhan [3] re-viewed the state of the art in the understanding and analysis of a large variety of heat pipes, and also identiﬁed the respective limitations. Modeling of heat pipes is complicated by the various mechanisms of heat, mass and momentum transport prevalent in the device, viz., the capillarity of the porous medium, evaporation/condensation in the wick structure, and conduction in the so-lid wall, among others. Models with approximate coupling between the various transport mechanisms have been developed and have led to fair predictions of heat pipe performance. In most of these cases, the wick structure has been assumed to be a continuous porous medium and the implications of micro-scale phenomena such as thin-ﬁlm evaporation and Marangoni convection in the wick pores have not been given much attention. As heat pipes and vapor chambers decrease in size, and surface-to-volume ratios increase, details of transport at the liquid–vapor interface may be-come increasingly important in determining heat pipe performance. Vadakkan et al. [4,5] developed a three-dimensional numerical model to study the performance of ﬂat heat pipes with multiple discrete heat sources. The effects of heat source strength and separation on steady as well as transient performance were studied. The wick–vapor interface was assumed to be ﬂat and local curvature effects were not considered. Ooijen and Hoogendoorn [6] presented a steady-state numerical analysis of the vapor core in a horizontal ﬂat heat pipe. Tournier and El-Genk [7] developed a two-dimensional model for the transient analysis of heat pipes. The analysis determined the radius of curvature of the liquid meniscus formed in the wick pores. Zhu and Vafai [8] studied the startup operating characteristics of asymmetrical ﬂat-plate and disk-shaped heat pipes using analytical models. Carbajal et al. [9] used a quasi-3D numerical analysis to obtain the temperature dis-tribution on the back side of a ﬂat heat pipe. They demonstrated that the ﬂat heat pipe led to a more uniform temperature distribution on the condenser side compared to a solid heat spreader. Koito et al. [10] developed a numerical model to solve the ﬂow and en-ergy equations in vapor chambers and estimated the capillary pressure head necessary to circulate the working ﬂuid inside the vapor chamber.
In a recent study, Do et al. [11] developed a mathematical mod-el for predicting the thermal performance of a ﬂat micro-heat pipe with a rectangular-grooved wick structure. They considered the effects of liquid–vapor interfacial shear stress and contact angle on device performance. Xiao and Faghri [12] developed a three-dimensional heat pipe model which accounted for heat conduction in the wall and ﬂuid ﬂow in the vapor core and porous wicks. Singh et al. [13] studied the effect of wick properties on the heat transfer characteristics of miniature loop heat pipes. Capillary structures with smaller pore size, high porosity, and high permeability showed better heat transfer characteristics in their experiments. Models [14–16] analyzing the performance of heat pipes with given wick structures have also been developed. Marangoni convection under large temperature differences was shown to have a signiﬁcant enhancement effect on heat transfer [17–19]. How-ever, the present authors [2] showed that Marangoni convection in the wick pores of heat pipes does not play a signiﬁcant role in enhancing the rate of evaporation heat transfer.
Most numerical models for predicting heat pipe performance do not consider the microstructure-scale ﬂow and heat transfer effects. Evaporation heat transfer from the thin liquid ﬁlm near the solid–liquid contact line of a liquid meniscus has been shown to account for more than 60% of the total heat transfer occurring from the meniscus [2,20]. In most conventional heat pipes and vapor chambers, the limiting thermal resistance is that of the wick, and the resistance due to the already efﬁcient evaporative heat transfer usually need not be considered. However, as device dimensions fall and wicks become thinner, liquid–vapor interface resistance may begin to play an increasingly important role in determining heat pipe performance. It is therefore important to develop heat pipe models which include the effects of microscale evaporation in wick pores on overall device performance.
Fig. 1(a) shows a schematic diagram of a ﬂat heat pipe. It consists of a solid copper wall, a porous wick structure (sintered powders in this case, and only present in this ﬁgure on the inside of the upper wall), and a vapor core. The evaporator and condenser regions are shown on the upper wall of heat pipe in this depiction. All other external surfaces are adiabatic. The liquid and vapor ﬂows shown in Fig. 1(a) complete the ﬂuid loop of heat pipe. Due to the high vapor pressure, a large capillary pressure is developed across the liquid–vapor interface in the wick pores of the evaporator section. The capillary pressure decreases towards the condenser section and the wet point condition (ﬂat interface) is reached at the end of the condenser section (with complete pressure recovery assumed in the vapor). The curvature of the liquid meniscus in the wick pores is determined by the interfacial capillary pressure. High capillary pressure in the evaporator section leads to higher interfacial curvature compared to the condenser region (as shown in the insets in Fig. 1(a)). The interface shape determines the extent of thin-ﬁlm meniscus formation in the wick pores, which in turn determines the interfacial resistance to heat transfer. In the present work, we have coupled a micro-scale wick-level model [21] with a macro-scale device-level model in order to capture the interface curvature effects in different microstructures. This will lead to a more accurate prediction of the effect of wick microstructure on the heat pipe performance.

2. Model description：
In the present work, a device-level numerical model (macro-model) is utilized to compute the ﬂow and temperature ﬁelds in a ﬂat heat pipe, also known as a vapor chamber. The macro-model solves for the continuity, momentum and energy equations in the solid wall, wick and vapor regions of the heat pipe. The wick-vapor interface is numerically modeled as a ﬂat interface while the wick structure is treated as a porous medium. The macro-model does not account for the curvature of the liquid meniscus formed inside the wick pores and thus ignores micro-scale details of thin-ﬁlm evaporation and Marangoni convection occurring during the evaporation process. To capture these micro-scale evaporation effects, a micro-model [21] which computes the evaporation of liquid in wick microstructures is coupled with the macro-model. Details of the two models and the algorithm used for coupling the two are now presented.

2.1. Device-level macro-model：
The device-level macro-model employed here is adapted from the work of Vadakkan et al. [4,5]. An equilibrium model for heat transfer and a Brinkman–Forchheimer extended Darcy model are employed for ﬂuid ﬂow in the wick. The transient change in vapor density due to pressurization is calculated using the ideal gas state equation. The vapor ﬂow is assumed to be laminar and incompressible. The phase-change mass ﬂow rate due to evaporation/condensation, and the temperature and pressure at the liquid–va-por interface are determined using an energy balance at the inter-face in conjunction with kinetic theory and the Clausius–Clapeyron equation. The energy balance at the interface includes convection and conduction on the liquid and vapor sides. The vapor ﬂow, and the temperature and hydrodynamic pressure ﬁelds are computed from coupled continuity/momentum and energy equations in the vapor and wick regions, and a conduction analysis in the wall. The model assumes that the wick is saturated with liquid throughout, which is required to prevent dryout.
To accommodate transient changes in the vapor and liquid mass under the assumption of a liquid-saturated wick, the volume-aver-aged density of the liquid is modiﬁed based on the mass balance. The model assumes all thermophysical properties to be constant except for the vapor density, which is found from the operating pressure Pop and the local temperature using the perfect gas law.

2.1.1. Governing equations and boundary conditions: macro-model：
Under the assumptions discussed above, the generalized governing equations for the wick and vapor regions may be written as shown below. The continuity equation for the wick and the va-por core is The above expression has been obtained with the assumption that the mean evaporation coefﬁcient is equal to the mean condensation coefﬁcient, where their variation with temperature and pressure may be assumed to be small [23]. The value of accommo-
dation coefﬁcient ^r in the above expression for evaporation mass transfer rate has been observed to vary over four orders of magni-tude, as described in [24]. A value of unity for the accommodation coefﬁcient has been widely used [25–27]. However, experimentally obtained accommodation coefﬁcients have been smaller due to contamination of the surface. The accommodation coefﬁcient has also been shown in experiments to depend on temperature [28,29] and vapor pressure [30]. Badam et al. [30] reported the accommodation coefﬁcient of water to be in the range of 0.028–0.15, which was deduced from evaporation experiments per-formed on water with the vapor pressure kept below 1200 Pa. Rose [31] reviewed the value of the accommodation coefﬁcient of water and suggested that its value lies in the range of 0.5–1. The value chosen for accommodation coefﬁcient determines the thermal resistance offered by the liquid–vapor interface in a vapor chamber, and it is critical that this value be determined carefully via experiments. Owing to the fact that the thermal performance of a vapor chamber may be greatly affected by the chosen value of
^r, we present our analysis for two values of ^r, viz., 0.03 and 1, to bracket the performance. The evaporated and condensed mass is assumed to ﬂow normal to the interface when accounting for transport due to evaporation/condensation.

2.1.2. Computation of operating pressure in vapor core：
Under the incompressible ﬂow assumption, hydrodynamic pressure differences are small as compared to the absolute operating pressure in the domain. To prevent round-off in the hydrodynamic pressure gradient computation, and to allow for system pressurization under the incompressible assumption, the pressure is split into two components: Additional details of the numerical method are available in [4,5]. The governing equations are solved in their transient form using the commercial CFD solver FLUENT [33]. A transient computation of the governing equations is necessary to set the level of pressure in the vapor domain. A steady, incompressible ﬂow calculation with all-velocity boundary conditions does not allow the pressure level to be determined uniquely since only the gradient of pressure appears in the governing equations. The pressure level is rendered unique by initial conditions; the speciﬁcation of the initial mass allows the pressure to be determined uniquely at each time step. It should be emphasized that this is not an artifact of the numerical scheme, but is a property of the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations. A detailed discussion of these issues can be found in previous work by the authors [4,5]. Suitable user-deﬁned functions (UDFs) have been developed to compute the evaporation/condensation mass ﬂow rates, temperature and pressure at the wick–vapor interface, as well as the liquid and vapor densities at every time step. The attainment of steady state is identiﬁed in this work as the time at which the heat transfer rate on the condenser side reaches within 2% of the value at the evaporator.

2.2. Wick-level micro-model：
The wick-level micro-model computes the evaporation heat transfer rate from the liquid meniscus formed in the pores of common wick structures used in heat pipes. The model considers only the top layer of wick pores, where the liquid meniscus is formed. Details of this model are available in Ranjan et al. [2,21]. An idealized two-dimensional representation of screen mesh wick struc-ture, viz., parallel horizontal wires for screen mesh wick, is used. The model assumes a static shape for the liquid meniscus formed inside wick pores. Static liquid meniscus shapes in the given wick geometries are obtained using the program Surface Evolver [34]. Surface Evolver computes the total surface energy of a given system and the equilibrium minimum energy conﬁguration is obtained by a gradient descent method. Details of this method can be found in [1]. With known curvature of the liquid meniscus in the wick pores, the capillary pressure generated by the wick structure (for a given wick porosity, length scale and solid–liquid con-tact angle) is also determined using the Young–Laplace equation. It should be noted that the meniscus level in the wick pore has been assumed to be equivalent to the radius of the wires in the present work. As presented in [1,2], this meniscus level leads to the highest capillary pressure generation in the wick pore; the evaporative heat transfer rate, on the other hand, was found to be unaffected by a change in the meniscus level. For future reference, this model is referred to as the static-meniscus micro-model.
Fig. 1(b) shows the equilibrium shape of a liquid meniscus formed between parallel horizontal wires (idealized representation for screen mesh wick; only top layer is shown here). The solid–li-quid contact angle is assumed to be 30, the porosity is 0.56, and the non-dimensional radius (radius taken as the length scale) of the wires is 1.The static liquid meniscus shapes thus computed are exported from Surface Evolver to GAMBIT [33] and the domain is discretized for ﬁnite volume computations in FLUENT [33]. It is noted that the assumption of a static meniscus shape under evaporative conditions would be valid for the very small Weber and Capillary numbers encountered in this work as is veriﬁed using simulations. The FLUENT model is used to compute ﬂow and heat transfer in the microstructure. This model is referred to as the wick-level micro-model. The mathematical formulation for modeling evaporation in wick structures is now presented.
2.2.1. Governing equations and boundary conditions: wick-level micro-model：
Fig. 1(c) shows the computational domain used for modeling evaporation from the liquid meniscus in wick microstructures. A unit cell representing the wick topology is modeled. Incompressible, laminar and steady ﬂow of water with constant properties is assumed in the liquid domain. The vapor is assumed to be saturated at a given temperature, as in an operating heat pipe. The wick-level micro-model is utilized only to correct the phase change mass ﬂow rates (Eq. (9)) at the wick–vapor interface in the macro-model. The vapor domain is not modeled since the absolute mass ﬂow rates in the heat pipe are not computed from the micro-model. The following continuity, momentum and energy equations are solved:
The boundary conditions for the case of a 2D meniscus between horizontal wires are shown in Fig. 1(c). The incoming liquid is assumed to be at a constant temperature, Tinlet, with a given pressure inlet boundary condition. A constant temperature boundary condition is applied at the bottom solid wall. A convective heat transfer boundary condition is imposed on the non-wetted portion of the so-lid particles exposed to vapor, labeled top wall in Fig. 1(c). The value of the natural convection coefﬁcient hnat from the surface of spheres and long wires is given by the Nusselt number correlation presented in [35]. The liquid–vapor interface is modeled as a ﬁxed interface with a convective boundary condition. To promote numerical stability, the heat transfer due to evaporation is implemented through an equivalent convective heat transfer coefﬁcient, hevap, which is obtained using the evaporative mass ﬂux expression (Eq. (9)), so that:
Evaporation from the liquid–vapor interface is modeled under the assumption of saturated vapor conditions, simulating heat pipe operation. The evaporative mass ﬂux at the interface is obtained according to Schrage [22] and is given by Eq. (9). Two values for
^r, 0.03 and 1.0 are used in the micro-model computations as mentioned earlier. Mass transport due to evaporation at the liquid–va-por interface is implemented by imposing mass sink terms in the liquid cells adjacent to the interface.
Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the temperature and ﬂow ﬁelds inside the wick pore for a meniscus between parallel horizontal wires, for
^r ¼ 0:03 and 1, respectively. The vapor is assumed to be saturated at 298 K. Standard thermophysical properties of water at 298 K are used in these simulations. The liquid–vapor interface is seen to be at the minimum temperature in the whole domain due to evapora-tion heat transfer. Non-uniformity in the meniscus thickness leads to differential evaporation rates, and consequently, a temperature gradient along the interface. This leads to the formation of two counter-rotating Marangoni vortices in the liquid domain. Evapo-rative mass ﬂux on the interface (Eq. (9)), from the solid–liquid contact line to the center of meniscus, is plotted in Fig. 2(c) for the two values of accommodation coefﬁcient. The evaporative mass ﬂux for ^r ¼ 0:03 is smaller than for ^r ¼ 1 by more than an order of magnitude. Also, for ^r ¼ 1, the evaporative mass ﬂux de-creases sharply to zero from the thin-ﬁlm region towards the central meniscus. From the detailed results in [2,21] obtained using ^r ¼ 1, thin-ﬁlm evaporation occurring near the solid–liquid contact line was found to account for more than 80% of the total evaporation from the interface. However, for ^r ¼ 0:03, it is seen
in Fig. 2(c) that the evaporative mass ﬂux decreases gradually from the contact line thin-ﬁlm region towards the central region. The contribution of the thin-ﬁlm region itself to the total evaporation from meniscus is insigniﬁcant for ^r ¼ 0:03. The authors previously
[2,21] showed that Marangoni convection is insigniﬁcant in enhancing evaporation in wick pores, and therefore, heat transfer at this scale is determined to ﬁrst order by thermal conduction.
The effects of changing the value of accommodation coefﬁcient on the rate of evaporation and the evaporation heat transfer coefﬁcient (as deﬁned in Eq. (26)) are considered further by simulating the evaporation of water from a liquid pool, using the wick-level micro-model. The domain for this problem is shown in Fig. 3(a), in which the vapor domain is assumed to be saturated at 298 K. Fig. 3(b) shows the variation of evaporation rate and evaporative
heat transfer coefﬁcient with ^r. With an increase in ^r from 0.18 to 1.6, the evaporative heat transfer coefﬁcient increases from 8.3 􀀁 104 W/m2 K to 3.32 􀀁 106 W/m2 K. However, the evaporation rate (ml) increases with an increase in ^r from 0.18 to 0.5, but be-comes independent of the value of ^r with further increases in ^r. This shows that for higher values of ^rð> 0:5Þ, the rate of evaporation is determined by the conduction heat transfer across the liquid pool (from inlet to the vapor domain) and the liquid–vapor inter-face resistance for heat transfer becomes negligible.

2.3. Coupling of macro- and micro-models：
The static-meniscus and wick-level micro-models described in the previous section are coupled with the device-level macro-mod-el in order to incorporate the effect of different microstructures on heat pipe performance. The macro-model does not account for the liquid–vapor interface shape in the wick pores, thin-ﬁlm evaporation or Marangoni convection. However, it has been noted [2,21] that thin-ﬁlm evaporation effects are critical for predicting the evaporative mass ﬂow rate correctly. Coupling the micro-models with the macro-model captures the micro-level aspects of evaporation from the liquid–vapor interface and examines the importance of the liquid–vapor interface in determining the device performance for given conditions. The algorithm for coupling the two types of models is now presented.
For a given heat input to the heat pipe, the local liquid–vapor interface shape is determined by the balance of surface tension The ratios of evaporative mass ﬂuxes in the wick pore for ^r ¼ 0:03 and 1.0 are obtained as a function of the solid–liquid con-
tact angle and wick porosity. The vapor temperature and solid wall superheat (see Tbot in Fig. 1(c)) are also varied to determine their effect on the mass ﬂux ratio. The mass ﬂux ratio changes by less than 5% for a 7 K variation in vapor temperature and a 15 K varia-tion in solid superheat, showing that the mass ﬂux ratio may be as-sumed to be unaffected by the vapor temperature and superheat. Variations of the mass ﬂux ratio with contact angle for various wick porosities are shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c) for ^r ¼ 0:03 and 1.0,
respectively. The mass ﬂux ratio is always greater than 1; this is due to the formation of a thin-ﬁlm meniscus at the solid–liquid contact line, and to a lesser extent, enhanced convection effects. The mass ﬂux ratio decreases with increasing contact angle and porosity. This is because the thin-ﬁlm area of the meniscus in a wick pore decreases with increase in contact angle and porosity. It can also be observed that the mass ﬂux correction ratios are
much greater for ^r ¼ 1 as compared to those for ^r ¼ 0:03. As it was discussed earlier (refer to the discussion regarding Fig. 2(c)), thin-ﬁlm evaporation effects near the solid–liquid contact line are more pronounced for ^r ¼ 1. This leads to higher mass ﬂux cor-rections for ^r ¼ 1 as compared to r^ ¼ 0:03. The following correla-tions are obtained for the mass ﬂux ratios as functions of contact angle (in degrees) for a porosity = 0.56 using the least-squares curve-ﬁt feature of MATLAB [36]:
Step 5: Correct the local evaporative mass ﬂow rate at the liquid–vapor interface in the macro-model using area and mass ﬂux ratios. Using the capillary pressure at the point of interest on the inter-face, the local contact angle h is ﬁrst computed using Eq. (30). Once h is known, the area and mass ﬂux corrections are computed from Eqs. (32)–(34), and the local evaporation mass ﬂow rates in the heat pipe macro-model are corrected using Eq. (31). The correc-tions are also employed in the calculation of interface temperature (Eq. (7)), and the computation of system pressure (Eq. (18)). This process is repeated during every iteration of the macro-model sim-ulation until convergence is obtained.

3. Results and discussion：
Simulation results for a 2D vapor chamber (as shown in Fig. 7(a)) using the device-level macro-model and coupled micro–macro models are presented in this section. The tempera-ture and ﬂow ﬁelds in the vapor chamber, as predicted by the macro-model, for given input heat ﬂux and condenser side condi-tions are discussed for two values of the accommodation coefﬁ-
cient, ^r ¼ 0:03 and 1. This is followed by the implications of using the micro–macro coupled model for the prediction of device performance under a given set of conditions. A smaller vapor chamber with a thinner wick structure and higher wick thermal conductivity, is discussed next in order to examine the role of the liquid–vapor interface on the performance of vapor chambers as they are miniaturized.

3.1. Description of vapor chamber under study：
A schematic diagram of a 2D ﬂat vapor chamber modeled in the present work is shown in Fig. 7(a). It incorporates a 5 mm wide evaporator region at the center of its top surface while the entire lower surface is the condenser region. A screen mesh is assumed for the wick. The vapor chamber has a height of 3 mm and a length of 30 mm. A solid wall thickness of 0.25 mm, a wick thickness of 0.2 mm and a vapor core thickness of 2.1 mm are chosen. All sur-faces other than the evaporator and condenser regions are mod-eled as adiabatic solid walls. The wall and wick are made of copper and the working ﬂuid is water. The porosity, permeability and thermal conductivity of the sintered screen mesh wick are 0.56, 2.97 􀀁 10􀀂11 m2, and 40 W/m K, respectively. Ergun’s coefﬁ-cient, CE, is taken to be 0.55. The radius of the wires in the screen mesh is assumed to be 100 lm. The wick is present on all sides of the vapor chamber. The heating and cooling boundary condi-tions are applied on opposite sides of the chamber. An input heat ﬂux of 10 W/cm2 is applied at the evaporator region of the heat pipe, leading to a heat input of 500 W/m. Standard thermophysical properties for water and copper at 298 K are utilized. The thermo-physical properties of the vapor chamber material and working ﬂuid are tabulated in Table 1. The coolant water temperature and the heat transfer coefﬁcient on the condenser are 298 K and 400 W/m2 K, respectively. The initial temperature of the heat pipe is 298 K and the vapor is assumed to be saturated.

3.2. Flow and temperature ﬁelds inside the vapor chamber：
Fig. 7(b)–(g) shows the temperature and ﬂow ﬁelds in the vapor chamber, predicted by the macro-model for ^r ¼ 1 and 0.03. The temperature drops across the vapor chamber for ^r ¼ 1 and 0.03 are 0.73 and 1.62 K, respectively. For the smaller value of the accommodation coefﬁcient, the thermal resistance of the liquid–vapor interface inside the vapor chamber is signiﬁcant, thus lead-ing to a higher thermal resistance of the vapor chamber. Fig. 7(b) and (c) shows the temperature contours in the vapor chamber. The working liquid evaporates at the liquid–vapor interface below the evaporator region of the vapor chamber and the vapor con-denses on the lower liquid–vapor interface. Fig. 7(d) and (e) shows Darcian approach appropriate in the wick medium. The liquid pres-
sure drops are found to be 323 and 320 Pa for ^r ¼ 1 and 0.03, respectively. The steady-state operating pressure of the heat pipe
is 31.9 and 32.1 kPa for ^r ¼ 1 and 0.03, respectively.
Fig. 8(a) and (b) shows the temperature values on the outer walls of the vapor chamber for the two values of accommodation coefﬁcient. The temperature is highest at the center of the evapo-rator region while that on the condenser side is uniform, as desired for a vapor chamber heat spreader. The predicted temperature drops show that the thermal resistance offered by the vapor cham-
ber is 1.46 􀀁 10􀀂3 K/W and 3.24 􀀁 10􀀂3 K/W for ^r ¼ 1 and 0.03, respectively. The evaporation/condensation mass ﬂuxes are plot-ted along the liquid–vapor interfaces on the evaporator and con-
denser sides of the vapor chamber in Fig. 8(c) and (d) for r^ ¼ 1 and 0.03, respectively. It is seen that the working ﬂuid evaporates from the upper liquid–vapor interface over a region approximately 1 cm long, which is twice the size of the evaporator heat input area. The vapor condenses uniformly over the liquid–vapor interface on the condenser side.

3.3. Effects of micro- and macro-model coupling：
Steady-state results from the micro–macro coupled heat pipe model are presented for the 2D vapor chamber in Fig. 7(a). The va-por chamber material, working ﬂuid properties and the thermal boundary conditions used are the same as those considered in the macromodel in the previous section. The thermal performance of the vapor chamber for both values of accommodation coefﬁcient is predicted with the coupled model and the results compared to the uncoupled macromodel.
The coupling of the micro–macro models is implemented by the means of correcting the interface mass ﬂow rates and the interfa-cial area based on the interfacial capillary pressure drop inside the vapor chamber. Fig. 9(a) and (b) presents the interfacial pressure drop and the local contact angle along the liquid–vapor interface in the vapor chamber for ^r ¼ 1 and 0.03, respectively. Points 1,
2, 3 and 4 correspond to different locations on the liquid–vapor interface in the vapor chamber, as marked in Fig. 7(a). The wet point is assumed to be at the center of the condenser region (at location 3) in the vapor chamber. The liquid pressure in the wick is highest at this location, as it would be at the end of the con-denser section in a cylindrical heat pipe. The interfacial capillary
pressure drop (318 Pa for ^r ¼ 1 and 317 Pa ^r ¼ 0:03) is highest at the center of the evaporator section, leading to the highest cur-
vature and smallest contact angle (69.9 for ^r ¼ 1 and 70 ^r ¼ 0:03) at this location. The contact angle increases from 69.9 in the evaporator section to 90 in the center of the condenser re-gion (i.e., at the wet point).
Fig. 9(c) and (d) shows the mass ﬂux correction, area correction and mass ﬂow rate correction ratios along the liquid–vapor inter-
face in the vapor chamber for ^r ¼ 1 and 0.03, respectively. The area correction ratio is predicted using Eq. (32) while the mass correc-tion ratios can be computed using Eqs. (33) and (34) for the two values of accommodation coefﬁcient. As can be observed from the ﬁgures, the corrections in interface area and mass ﬂow rate are highest at the point of highest curvature and lowest contact an-gle, i.e., the center of the evaporator region (point 1). The correc-tions become smaller as the condenser section is approached since the meniscus curvature in the wick pore decreases from the evaporator center towards the center of the condenser region. Mass ﬂux correction ratios are higher for ^r ¼ 1 as compared to those for ^r ¼ 0:03. The total correction ratio is the product of area and mass ﬂux correction ratios and it shows a similar variation as the mass ﬂux correction ratio along the liquid–vapor interface in
the vapor chamber. For ^r ¼ 1, the total correction ratio is greater than 1 leading to an enhancement in the evaporation/condensation
rates in the vapor chamber. For ^r ¼ 0:03, the total correction ratio is smaller than 1, thus reducing the rate of evaporation/condensa-tion inside the chamber. With a decrease in the phase change rates, it is expected that the thermal resistance of the vapor chamber will increase when a working ﬂuid with very small accommodation coefﬁcient is used in the vapor chamber.
A comparison between the non-coupled and coupled models is now presented. For ^r ¼ 1, as presented in Fig. 9(c), the mass ﬂow
rate correction ratios are greater than 1 (in the range of 1.4–1.6). This leads to an increase in the evaporation/condensation heat transfer coefﬁcient at the liquid–vapor interface, thus reducing the thermal resistance offered by the interface in the device. How-ever, as discussed at the end of Section 2.2.1, the rate of evapora-tion from a liquid meniscus will be only slightly affected if the
evaporation heat transfer coefﬁcient is enhanced when r^ > 0:5. A similar observation is made by comparing the temperature drops across the vapor chamber from the non-coupled and coupled mod-els. The non-coupled model predicts the temperature drop across the vapor chamber to be 0.72 K while the coupled model predicts it to be 0.7 K (􀀄3% decrease in the temperature drop). However,
for ^r ¼ 0:03, the temperature drop predicted by the coupled model is 1.92 K, while the non-coupled model predicts a temperature drop of 1.62 K. The temperature drop predicted by the coupled model is 􀀄16% higher than that from the non-coupled model. The increase in thermal resistance can be explained on the basis of the mass ﬂow rate correction ratios being smaller than 1 for ^r ¼ 0:03, as presented in Fig. 9(d). Hence, the coupled model incor-
porates the increase in the thermal resistance of the vapor cham-ber by accounting for the liquid–vapor interface thermal resistance in the vapor chamber. With the coupled model, the stea-dy-state operating pressure of the vapor chamber decreases from
31.9 kPa (non-coupled model) to 31.8 kPa for ^r ¼ 1. This is due to the decrease in the working temperature of the vapor chamber.
However, for ^r ¼ 0:03, the working temperature of the vapor
chamber increases as a result of coupling and so, the coupled mod-el predicts the operating pressure to be 32.2 kPa (32.1 kPa pre-dicted by the non-coupled model).
Fig. 10(a) and (b) shows the temperature contours in the vapor chamber and the temperature values on the outer surfaces of the vapor chamber, as predicted by the coupled model for ^r ¼ 0:03.
3.3.1. Vapor chamber with a thinner, higher-conductivity wick：
As discussed above, the coupling of the wick-level micro-model with the device-level macro-model leads to an accurate assessment of the role of the liquid–vapor interface inside the vapor chamber for determining its spreading behavior, i.e., the thermal perfor-mance. It is shown that the coupling is important for accurate predictions in the case of working ﬂuids with small accommodation coefﬁcients. From a ﬁrst-order approximation, it can be shown that the liquid–vapor interface thermal resistance (􀀄1/hevapAi) is equiv-alent to that offered by the wick structure itself (􀀄wick thickness/(kwickAi)) when the wick thickness is 40 lm (calculated with hevap =106 W/m2 K for r^ ¼ 1, kwick = 40 W/m K). hevap is much smal-ler (􀀄104 W/m2 K) for ^r ¼ 0:03 and so the interface thermal resis-tance becomes signiﬁcant in comparison to the wick resistance
for even thicker wicks (􀀄4 mm) when r^ ¼ 0:03. Also, the wick thermal resistance decreases when the wick thermal conductivity is increased and it is no longer the controlling thermal resistance in vapor chamber operation. An accurate determination of the interface thermal resistance becomes increasingly important for thinner wicks of high thermal conductivity. Novel wick structures containing metallic nanowires and carbon nanotubes [37], have been proposed recently. In this section, the numerical simulations are repeated for the same vapor chamber geometry described in the previous section except with a thinner wick (50 lm) and higher wick thermal conductivity (176.3 W/m K). The thermal conductiv-ity of the solid in the porous wick medium is set to be 400 W/m K. Some novel wick microstructures, such as carbon nanotubes and metallic nanowires, have been shown [38,39] to possess such high values of thermal conductivity. Also, the wick permeability is taken to be 2.97 􀀁 10􀀂10 m2. All other properties and boundary con-ditions for the vapor chamber are kept the same as discussed in the previous section.
Fig. 11(a) and (b) shows the temperature contours in the vapor chamber and velocity magnitude contours in the vapor core of the device. The temperature on the outer wall of the vapor chamber is plotted in Fig. 11(c). Results in Fig. 11 correspond to the coupled model and an accommodation coefﬁcient of 0.03. For this case, the liquid pressure drop inside the wick structure is 524 Pa while the steady-state operating pressure of the device is 29.4 kPa. dicted by the coupled and non-coupled models are 0.11 and 0.13 K, respectively. Hence, the non-coupled model over-predicts the tem-
perature drop by 􀀄15%. For ^r ¼ 0:03, the temperature drops across the vapor chamber as predicted by the coupled and non-coupled models are 1.49 and 1.18 K, respectively. This shows that the non-coupled model under-predicts the temperature drop across the vapor chamber by 􀀄26%. Fig. 12(a) presents the interfacial pressure drop and the local contact angle along the liquid–vapor
interface in the vapor chamber for r^ ¼ 0:03. The interfacial pres-sure drop (524 Pa) is highest at the center of the evaporator sec-tion, leading to the highest curvature and the smallest contact angle (55.7) at this location. Again, the contact angle increases from 55.7 in the evaporator section to 90 at the center of the con-denser region (i.e., at the wet point). Fig. 12(b) shows the mass ﬂux correction, area correction and mass ﬂow rate correction ratios along the liquid–vapor interface in the vapor chamber for
^r ¼ 0:03. The corrections in interface area and mass ﬂow rate are highest at the point of highest curvature and lowest contact angle, i.e., the center of the evaporator region (point 1). Again, the correc-tions become smaller as the condenser section is approached since the meniscus curvature in the wick pore decreases from the evap-oration center to the center of condenser region. 

4. Conclusions：
A three-dimensional numerical model for ﬂat heat pipes which accounts for the effect of wick structure in determining the evapo-ration rate at the liquid–vapor interface is developed. A device-le-vel macro-model is coupled with a wick-level micro-model. This coupling leads to corrections to the evaporative mass ﬂow rates at the liquid–vapor interface in the wick pore as well as to the interfacial area. These corrections are based on the local contact angle of liquid in the wick structure, and change along the location in the vapor chamber. Due to this coupling, thin-ﬁlm evaporation, meniscus curvature effects, and Marangoni convection effects on the heat transfer rate from the liquid–vapor interface are ac-counted for in the device-level macro-model. 
Flow and temperature ﬁelds in a two-dimensional ﬂat heat pipe/vapor chamber are computed using the original macro-model and the coupled macro-model. The simulations are performed for two different values of the accommodation coefﬁcient of the work-ing ﬂuid, viz., 0.03 and 1. From the results obtained using the cou-pled and non-coupled model, it is inferred that the thermal resistance offered by the liquid–vapor interface inside the vapor chamber may become signiﬁcant and affects the performance of the vapor chamber as the device is miniaturized, and as novel high-conductivity thin wicks become available. In these situations, the transport effects at the liquid–vapor interface must be cor-rectly incorporated in order to accurately predict the performance of the vapor chamber. The need for a coupled model becomes imperative when (a) the thickness of the wick structure is very small (in the order of 100 lm), (b) the thermal conductivity of wick structure is very high (>100 W/m K), or (c) when the accommoda-tion coefﬁcient of the working ﬂuid is very small (<0.1). The basic methodology developed in this work is applicable to other types of microstructures, operating conditions and device designs as well.