Large eddy simulations of the Darmstadt turbulent stratified flame series
Abstract
Large-eddy simulations of the Darmstadt turbulent stratified flame (TSF) burner are presented. The TSF burner is operated under a wide variety of conditions. A case without stratification or shear, and one with stratification but no shear, are considered for validation purposes. A combined mixture fraction and reaction progress variable approach is used, with the reaction rate modelled by a fractal flame wrin￾kling flame surface density model, where the laminar flame speed is obtained as a function of the mixture fraction. The simulation results and the suitability of the modelling approach are verified and validated through comparison of mean and variance of axial and radial velocity, temperature and mixture fraction with experimental data. The effects of stratification on the flame flow field are then studied by comparing the two reactive simulations, and studying the impact of the cross-scalar dissipation rate term. Finally, the occurrence of potential back- or front-supported stratification is examined through statistical analysis of the flame normal directions. The modelling approach employed was found to produce very good predic￾tions of the TSF burner, with both back- and front-supported stratification modes occurring, the former being considerably more likely.
1. Introduction
Large eddy simulation (LES) relies on resolving the largest structures while modelling the effect of those that have a size below a specified filter width D. The technique yields advantages over classical Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) [1,2] and is particularly useful in the prediction of unsteady reactive flows. From a practical stand￾point, many combustion processes rely on reactive mixtures that are non-homogenous, an example is the direct injection IC engine, where liquid fuel is injected into the combustion chamber to generate a highly stratified fuel/air mixture at ignition in order to achieve improved energy conversion [3]. Several numerical and experimental studies have shown that stratification has a significant impact on the heat release rate, flame propagation speed, flame structure and stabilisation mechanism. In two-dimensional direct numerical simulation (2D￾DNS) studies conducted by Jime´nez et al. [4], a fuel-lean propane mixture with an asymmetric equivalence ratio / distribution yielded substan-tially higher heat release rate per unit flame length than for a homogenous mixture. Experiments [5] and numerical simulations [6] of laminar flames showed increases in flame propagation speed for back-supported stratified flames due to the ele￾vated heat flux and radical concentrations in the richer products. Stratification also has the effect of altering the flame structure, such as increasing the flame surface density above that of a turbulent premixed flame at the same mean equivalence ratio 7,8]. Fluctuations in the equivalence ratio for stratified flames can also induce additional stretch￾ing of the flame causing a reduced flame thickness [9]. Finally, in laboratory-scale flames, stratifica￾tion can change the flame shape as the stabilisation point of the flame can alter. For example, the lean premixed stratified burner by Kim and Hochgreb [10] displayed an M-shaped geometry for a fully premixed flame which can develop into either a dihedral V-flame or a toroidal detached flame depending on the relative fuel richness in the outer and inner streams. A similar observation is reported by Nogenmyr et al. [11], whose study showed an alternating appearance of V- and W￾shaped flames. To date, there are only a limited number of stratified laboratory scale flames [8–10,12,13] that enable LES numerical validation, and the question remains as to whether the existing numerical mod￾els can describe the changes in flame behaviour. As flame speeds are dependent on the local equiva￾lence ratio, flame wrinkling may increase to an extent that specific combustion models may be required. Coupling between the mixture fraction and laminar flame speed also presents a numerical challenge. In the LES of premixed combustion, several modelling concepts have been established to describe the unclosed reaction rate; for example, the artificially thickened flame (ATF) [14,15] approach, the flame front tracking technique (G￾equation) [16–18] and the flame surface density (FSD) method [19–21]. The present work focuses on the latter, which involves closing the reaction rate term within the progress variable c transport equation by means of an algebraic model [20]. Since the flame propagates through an inhomoge￾neous mixture, an additional transport equation for the mixture fraction z will need to be considered and coupled with the c transport equation. The Darmstadt methane/air stratified burner studied by Seffrin et al. [13,22], is an open annu￾lar-burner  esigned in a way that allows the gen￾eration of both shear and stratification in the flow. Consequently the burner can be operated under several different test configurations [13], of which three are simulated in the absence of shear. These are the partially premixed case G, the stratified case A and their non-reactive equiva￾lent A i2 case, summarised in Table 1. The simu￾lations are compared to a range of experimental data such as velocity, temperature and mixture fraction at various locations downstream of the burner exit. Apart from assessing the performance of the LES modelling, we intend to study in detail the physics of the reactive flow for both premixed and stratified operating conditions. The stratifica￾tion may have a significant impact on the flow field as described in the earlier references. This study relies on the relatively simple closure by Fureby [20], and Duwig and Fureby [12], and aims to establish the applicability and limitations of the closure with respect to the prediction of the Darmstadt stratified flame.
2. Numerical modelling
The Favre-filtered governing equations for incompressible fluid flow of temperature depen￾dent density are solved. The turbulent viscosity mt is described using the Smagorinsky model [23] with a fixed constant Cs = 0.173 [24]. For the reactive case, two additional LES-fil￾tered transport equations of z and c must be solved to describe stratified combustion. The mix￾ture fraction z is defined according to Bilger [25] and takes values of 0 and 1 in air and fuel streams, respectively. The filtered mixture fraction trans￾port equation [26] reads:where q, u and l denote the fluid density, flow velocity vector and dynamic viscosity, respec￾tively. The sub-grid convection term in the equa￾tion has been replaced by the simple gradient diffusion expression [26], and the laminar and tur￾bulent Schmidt numbers (Sc and Sct, respectively) are both set to 0.7. The progress variable c can be defined in terms of fuel mass fraction Y F ：where superscripts
u and b denote unburnt and burnt states, respectively. Applying the definition of c to the transport equation of YF and using the relation , where the superscript 0 denotes the mass fraction of fuel in the fuel stream [26], the c transport equation is derived [12,27]: where D is the molecular diffusivity. Equation (2) is valid for both premixed and diffusion combus￾tion [27]. The third term on the RHS of Eq. (2) accounts for the transport of reactants across iso-contours of z, while the last term can be neglected, since for lean flames it can be assumed that all the fuel is burnt Y b. Simplifying and applying LES-filtering, Eq. (2) can be simplified according to Duwig and Fureby [12]: Similar to the ~ z transport equation, the sub-grid convection term can be modelled using the simple gradient assumption. The third term on the RHS of Eq. (3) (henceforth referred to as T3) compen￾sates for the computed flame propagation speed and direction variations resulting from the non￾uniformity of the reactants’ composition [12,28]. For instance, if a flame is propagating towards a leaner mixture (as is typically the case), the flame will accelerate, and vice versa. This term can be seen as a cross-scalar dissipation rate, which is modelled using an effective diffusivity. The molecular diffusion and reaction rate (after LES filtering) can be expressed together in terms of generalised flame surface density Rgen [12,19]:Rgen, where Sd Þs is the density weighted surface-averaged displacement speed. Assuming that curvature effects are weak, [29] with Su denoting the unstretched laminar flame speed. In this case, Su is a local field dependent on the local mixture fraction or equiva￾lence ratio. Substantial data for laminar burning velocities of methane/air flames at varying compo￾sitions are present in the literature [6,30,31] (Fig. 1). In this work, the data by Pires Da Cruz et al. [6] was chosen for Su and interpolated using a third-order polynomial. It is worth noting that the quasi-linearity between Su and / within the range 0.6 < / < 0.9 in Fig. 1 suggests that no expli￾cit modelling of the z sub-grid distribution is required to accurately compute the filtered laminar flame speed. The remaining variable Rgen is related to the wrinkling factor N by: Rgen， which N is formulated using the fractal flame wrinkling (FFW) model proposed by Fureby [20]. The model was found to perform very well in a-pri￾ori [29] as well as in a-posteriori studies [12,32], and is given by: D and Df denote the efficiency function, the subgrid-scale velocity fluctuation and fractal dimension, respectively. Note that unity is added in the model so that N = 1 in laminar regions of the flow field (in the original formulation, the transport equation of kinetic energy k was solvedwith the condition that k > 0 throughout the flow field, so the addition of unity was not necessary). In the present work, it is observed that the magni￾tude of the wrinkling factor lies predominantly be￾tween values of 2 and 3, reaching values of up to 5 in the most wrinkled regions, where stratification occurs. The efficiency function in Eq. (4) serves to account for the net straining effect of eddies smaller than D on the flame and is modelled fol￾lowing Angelberger et al. [14] as: where dL denotes the Zel’dovich flame thickness, defined as D/Su. This flame thickness in the present work is estimated to range from 0.07 to 0.22 mm, depending on the mixture composition, leading to D/dL values of 4.5–14.3 and 2.2–7.1 for the coarse and fine grids, respectively. The subgrid scale velocity fluctuations u0 D in Eq. (5) can be determined by Deardorff [33]:where Cv = 0.1 [34] and the turbulent viscosity mtis estimated from the Smagorinsky model [23]. Fi￾nally, Df is computed through the empirical para￾Fig. 1. Plot of laminar fmetric relation: Df ¼ 2:05= u0 as proposed by North and Santavicca [35]. It is important to note that the issue of flame brush thickness control has been discussed [36–38] for FSD models, in particular far downstream of the burner nozzle. Indeed, the agreement of experiment and simulation may be considered as evidence that the issue is not critical for the Darmstadt stratified flames.
3. Experimental setup and numerical implementa￾tion
For the present investigation, the TSF burner studied by Seffrin et al. [13] is considered, and sketched in Fig. 2. The burner consists of three concentric tubes surrounded by an air co-flow. The inner diameters of the tubes are 14.8 mm, 37 mm and 60 mm, respectively, and the tube length is 500 mm. The central tube acts as the pilot and the flame is stabilized by a flame holder ring situated 40 mm upstream from the pilot tube exit. The design of this burner allows various test configurations to be studied, since the flow rate and equivalence ratios can be adjusted indepen￾dently of the pilot and of each other. The effects of shear and stratification on the flow can there￾fore be examined in greater detail, and the burner presents opportunities for a wide range of interest￾ing computational studies which can be readily compared to experimental data. The velocities of the flow field were measured using laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) and particle image velocimetry (PIV) at locations 1, 50 and 100 mm downstream of the pilot tube exit for the non-reactive case, while data from more locations are provided for the reactive case. Temperature and other scalar data were obtained from planar Rayleigh scatter￾ing and Raman/Rayleigh line imaging. The simulation is performed with the in-house 3D low-Mach solver, PsiPhi [39,40]. The governing equations of mass, momentum, mixture fraction and reaction progress variable are discretised using the finite volume approach on a Cartesian uniform grid of cubic cells where the cell size represents the filter width. The computational domain is shown in Fig. 2, having a total length of 220 mm, and a width of 240 mm in both y- and z- directions (cropped in the figure). Two grid resolutions of 1 and 0.5 mm are used to study grid-independence, the fine grid corresponding to a 2  2  2 refinement of the coarse grid, leading to domain sizes of more than 12.7 million and 101.4 million cells. To ensure numerical accuracy, the advection term for momentum is discretised using a second-order cen￾tral differencing scheme, and a low storage third order Runge–Kutta scheme is used to advance in time. Neumann conditions are applied at the out- flow boundaries of the computational domain and pseudo-turbulent inflow conditions are created [41,42]. The inflow profiles are generated by impos￾ing non-reactive experimental data obtained at the burner outlet (1 mm downstream) for mean and fluctuating axial and radial velocities. The reactive simulations use the same inflow data, with the pilot velocity adjusted to match the experimental profile of an intermediate case A i1, in which only the pilot is burning. Imposing such inflow profiles at the burner exit avoids the necessity of simulating the whole rig, making detailed studies of different flame configurations more affordable. The burner oper￾ating conditions for both the isothermal and reac￾tive cases are summarised in Table 1. The non￾reactive simulation was performed as a validation study to demonstrate the ability of the chosen approach to accurately simulate the flow. A physi￾cal time of 0.4 s was simulated for all three cases, which represents approximately 13 flow-through times of the bulk flow. The time-step width was determined by a CFL limit of 0.7 for both the iso￾thermal and the reactive case, leading to a total computational time of roughly 35,000 CPUh for the reactive fine grid simulation on 48 processors.
The CFL number was chosen based on experience, as a conservative value that ensures stability and good accuracy; the need to resolve the chemical time scale is avoided by the FSD modelling approach for LES that is the basis for our work.
4. Results and discussion
In the following section the LES results are compared to the experimental data for both the isothermal and reacting cases, and their accuracy is discussed. An analysis of the effect of stratifica￾tion is also presented.
4.1. Isothermal flow
A detailed study of the isothermal flow of the TSF burner and its sensitivity to the effects of varying the Smagorinsky constant, the inflow length-scales, the filter width and sampling period, as well as the consequences of imposing different mean radial profiles, was carried out [43]. From this, coarse (filter-width D = 1.0 mm) and fine (D = 0.5 mm) grids were chosen, with an inflow length-scale of 2 mm for the inflow generator. Despite the fine grid producing more accurate results, the coarse grid was deemed sufficiently accurate to describe the flow field for the isother￾mal flow, and thus was retained to perform initial reactive simulations. Grid convergence was based on comparison of both grids. The effect of varying the turbulent viscosity was minimal, and as such the value of 0.173 was retained for the Smagorin￾sky constant, avoiding the additional cost of using a dynamic modelling approach such as Ger￾mano’s [44]. The axial and radial mean and fluctu￾ating velocities are compared to experimental values for the fine grid in Figs. 3 and 4, and it is observed that the simulation agrees well with the experimental data.
4.2. Non-stratified reacting flow
In order to provide an intermediate stepbetween the isothermal case A _ i2, and the strati- fied case A _r, the simpler premixed case G _r was considered. Correct simulation of G _ r verifies the implementation of the modelling approach thus far, and serves as a basis for comparison with the stratified case A _ r. Only velocity data is avail￾able for this case, and this is compared to results from the fine grid simulations in Figs. 5 and 6. The mean axial velocities are correctly represented by the simulations, with an overestimation of the flow towards the centreline at 50 mm from the outlet, which is explained by the heat losses observed in the pilot tube, which have not been considered in the simulation. The mean radial velocities also show a similar shape to the experi￾mental values, with deviations that represent a discrepancy of less than 3% of the bulk velocity. Overall, despite some minor differences, it can be that the flow field in case G_r is well￾predicted by the simulation 
4.3. Stratified reacting flow 
Axial and radial velocity data from the fine grid simulation of stratified case A _ r are also com￾pared to experimental data in Figs. 5 and 6. Both quantities are sufficiently well represented by the simulations throughout, with deviations of a sim￾ilar size and nature to those discussed for case G _ r. Temperature and mixture fraction data for this case are also compared to the experimental data in Figs. 7 and 8. The mean mixture fraction at 45 mm appears to under-predict the experimen￾tal value at the pilot; however, this seems unlikely, since the experimental value here is higher than the value at the inflow (marked by a dashed line in the plot). At the same time, the mixture fraction variance would be expected to be zero in the homogeneous region near the burner and the centreline. The temperature field is also well repre￾sented by the simulation, although the fluctua￾tions are under-predicted at 100 mm despite the accurate mean values. The simulated temperature and mixture fraction profiles for case G _ r were included in these plots to provide a qualitative comparison.
4.4. Impact of stratification
It has been shown in the previous sections that the flow fields in the TSF burner under both non￾stratified and stratified conditions are well repre￾sented by the simulations. This section focuses on analysing and presenting scalar field data and ends that would be non-trivial to study experimentally. Two types of stratification exist, namely back￾supported and front-supported, with the former occurring when the flame-front propagates towards a leaner mixture, and the latter when the propagation is directed towards a richer mix￾ture. Despite a back-supported flame propagating towards a leaner mixture, and hence a region with a lower local laminar flame speed, back-supported flames have been shown to locally accelerate the laminar flame speed, with the opposite being true for a front-supported flame [5,6]. By taking statis￾tics on T3 and observing the mean fields of the progress variable and the mixture fraction, it is possible to estimate the location where the cross￾scalar dissipation rate will become significant, and where stratification will occur. A plot of the mean value of the ratio of T3 to the whole source term ðT3 þ x ~ _ Þ is shown in Fig. 9, at a location 50,100 and 150 mm downstream of the burner exit, where stratification was expected. However, this shows that the impact of T3 on the total source is low, although arguably non-negligible. A scatter plot of ~ z against ~ c at a similar location (100 mm downstream, 40 mm from the central axis) is presented in Fig. 10, showing the wide range of ~z found in the unburnt state, whereas a fully burnt state is only achieved for mixture frac￾tions exceeding 0.03. The models employed in the simulation assume that the flame propagates through a locally homo￾geneous mixture. To assess the validity of this assumption, scatter plots of jr~ zj against ~ c (also normalised by D on the secondary axis) have been studied at several locations in the flow field where stratification was expected. Due to space con￾straints only one representative location is reported here, as shown in Fig. 11. The maximumnormalised gradients (the change over a single cell) in the mixture fraction are of around 1%, which, considering our range of mixture fractions (0– 4.9%), corresponds to changes of less than 20% within a cell. The laminar flame speed does not change much with this [6], and depends almost lin￾early on ~ z in the region considered, so that there is no need for a sub-grid model for the filtered lami￾nar flame speed (i.e. zÞ). Furthermore, the majority of the scatter points lie within a range of gradients (0–0.2%) corresponding to a normalised gradient of around 4%, in which shifts of flame speed due to local stratification are expected to be low.
In an attempt to show the stratification modes found in the A _ r flame, a scatter plot of the direc￾tions of the two-dimensional (axial and radial) gradient components of ~ z and ~ c was studied at a representative location in the flow field, as shown in Fig. 12. The plot also indicates iso-lines of max￾imum stratification (when the flame is propagat￾ing in the same direction as the gradient of ~ z) and iso-lines of no stratification (when the flame propagates perpendicular to the direction of the gradient of ~ z). A negative ~ c gradient direction indi￾cates the local flame propagation is in the same direction as the bulk propagation, away from the centreline (henceforth referred to as normal propagation). Conversely, a positive ~ c gradient direction indicates the flame is locally propagating towards the centreline, and hence the flame must be locally wrinkled (henceforth referred to as wrinkled propagation). Under normal local flame propagation, a negative ~z gradient direction will represent locally a back-supported flame (bottom left quadrant), or a front-supported flame for a positive ~ z gradient (top left quadrant), provided the two gradients are not perpendicular to each other. The opposite is true for a locally wrinkled flame: back-supported stratification occurs with a positive ~ z gradient (top-right quadrant), and vice-versa. The scatter data recorded in the simu￾lation closely matches what one could estimate from the burner geometry and operating condi￾tions: the data-points are mainly clustered around the iso-line of maximum back-supported stratifi- cation, with the most frequent occurrence being under normal propagation; however, a consider￾able amount of back-supported wrinkled propaga￾tion is also observed. A small degree of front￾supported stratification is also seen, as illustrated by the distribution presented in Fig. 13: this shows the normalised frequency of the occurrence of stratification, obtained by the absolute difference of the directions of r~ c and r~ z，grouping normal and wrinkled propagation. At p/2 the gradients of ~ c and ~ z are perpendicular so no stratification occurs, whereas the region p/2 ! 0 corresponds to increasing back-supported stratification and conversely p/2 ! p indicates increasing front-sup￾ported stratification. Figure 13 illustrates how a strong back-supported stratification is dominant, despite the occurrence of some front-supported stratification and no stratification at this represen￾tative location.
Finally, a basic time-series analysis of ~ z and ~ c and their correlation was also performed by integrating the auto-correlation functions of their signals, using a standard definition [36]. The cross￾correlation between ~ z and ~ c was found to be 0.55, showing a significant correlation of the two sca￾lars. The time-scales of ~ z and ~ c were found to be 0.46 ms and 0.69 ms, respectively.
5. Conclusions 
LES of the Darmstadt stratified flame series was performed for three cases: isothermal A _ i2, reactive G _ r, and stratified reactive A _ r. The sim￾ulations of the isothermal case were compared to LDV and PIV data for the axial and radial mean and fluctuating velocities, showing an excellent agreement. The reactive cases G _ r and A _ r were also compared to these velocity measurements, showing good agreement, despite some slight dif￾ferences which have been discussed. Temperature and mixture fraction data for the stratified com￾bustion case A _r have been compared to experi￾mental data in terms of its mean and fluctuating values, showing a very good agreement, and with justification of the resulting deviations. Addition￾ally, it was shown that the cross-scalar dissipation term (T3) has a relatively small, yet non-negligible, influence on the total source term. Furthermore a basic time-series analysis was included to show the significant correlation between the reaction pro￾gress variable ~ c and the mixture fraction ~ z, and their different time-scales. Finally, a detailed anal￾ysis of the mode and strength of the stratification  occurring at a selected location was presented, finding back-supported stratification to be indeed more likely. It can also be concluded that Fure￾by’s simple and computationally efficient FSD modelling approach with a mixture fraction dependent laminar flame speed can indeed providevery good predictions for the Darmstadt stratified flame series.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the Engineering and Physical Sci￾ences Research Council. The authors also thank Benoit Fiorina, Renaud Mercier and in particular Guido Kuenne for the many helpful discussions, and Florian Seffrin and Andreas Dreizler for sup￾plying the experimental data.
The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the Engineering and Physical Sci￾ences Research Council. The authors also thank Benoit Fiorina, Renaud Mercier and in particular Guido Kuenne for the many helpful discussions, and Florian Seffrin and Andreas Dreizler for sup￾plying the experimental data. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http:// dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.08.001.



