Experimental and numerical study on the influence of equivalence ratio on key intermediates and silica nanoparticles in flame synthesis
ABSTRACT
Tetramethyl silane is a precursor often used for the production of flame synthesized silica nanoparticles or coatings. This study investigates the chemical reaction mechanism of tetramethyl silane in a series of H2/O2/Ar low pressure (p 30 mbar) flames from fuel lean to slightly fuel rich flame conditions (? 0.8, 1.0 and 1.2). Mole fraction profiles are obtained by molecular beam mass spectrometry. The experimental data are compared to simulations using a recently published reaction mechanism. The present study reveals the influence of the flame composition on the depletion of the precursor TMS, the formation of its main carbon containing products (e.g. CO2 and CO) and the main silicon containing intermediates (e.g. Si(CH3)3(CH2)OO), Si(OH)4, SiO2, Si4O10H4) appearing along the routes of particle formation. TEM images of synthesized particles reveal that the nanoparticles obtained from the gas phase synthesis are spheres with a low degree of agglomeration. The particle size distribution appears to be dependent on the equivalence ratio of the synthesis flames and the changes can tentatively be traced to different particle formation pathways. The data set provided in this work can serve a basis for improvements to the reaction mechanisms of the Si/C/H/O system that are urgently needed to improve particle synthesis processes.
INTRODUCTION
Silica nanoparticles are useful materials for advanced medical and pharmaceutical applications e.g. biosensing, or drug delivery. To enable the synthesis of nanoparticles with properties, e.g. size distributions, adequate for the respective application, the fundamentals of the synthesis process must be understood. They include the precursor decomposition in the flame, interaction of precursor and intermediates with flame species and the influence of the flame conditions on the particle properties. Although, many studies were carried out with different silicon containing precursors, the exact reaction mechanisms leading to the formation of silica nanoparticles from the intermediates are still unclear. Britten et al. developed one of the first reaction mechanisms for silane combustion consisting of 25 species and 70 reactions. Miller et al. extended the reaction mechanism to 58 Si containing species and 201 reactions. These include a reaction path for silane combustion starting from SiH3 O2 and the first steps towards silica cluster formation from SiO.
Feroughi et al. studied hexamethyl disiloxane (HMDSO) doped flames by measuring SiO profiles via laser induced fluorescence and postulated SiO as an important species for the silica cluster formation in flames. Chrystie et al. investigated the impact of precursor load on the SiO concentrations. Shekar et al. emphasized the relevance of Si(OH)4 monomers in the gas phase for the formation of nanoparticles and based a detailed population balance model for the aerosol synthesis of silica nanoparticles from tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) on this hypothesis.
Nurkowski et al. proposed a detailed chemical reaction mechanism for the pyrolysis of TEOS, reduced it to a skeletal chemical mechanism and validated it for a hydrogen oxygen flame. Various computational studies on high temperature oxidation of TEOS postulate Si(OH)4 as one of the most relevant silicon species over a wide range of the temperatures.
Recently, a detailed reaction mechanism for the destruction of tetramethyl silane (TMS) combustion was developed by Janbazi et al.. Based on numerous experimental data and in particularly on molecular beam mass spectrometry data of TMS oxidation in hydrogen flames, a TMS sub-mechanism consisting of 28 reactions and 24 Si containing species was incorporated into the C1 mechanism proposed by Li et al.. The transport data and thermodynamic properties of SiCH and Si COH containing species are taken from literature. Rate coefficients were estimated either by analogy to the hydro carbon chemistry, by Rice每Ramsperger每Kassel每 Marcus calculations or by an optimization engine based on genetic algorithms with the flame data as optimization targets. The performance of the mechanism was further evaluated with flames of the same equivalence ratio doped with 400 and 800 ppm of TMS, which show that different doping leads to different mole fractions of intermediates in the experiments without changing the overall reaction pathways in the flames. The next step to improve the reaction mechanism further, is the evaluation if it can reproduce the interaction between precursor and flame chemistry correctly. One way to test the influence of different oxygen, water, and radical mole fractions on the reaction pathways of TMS oxidation, is to change the equivalence ratio of the flames. The work reported here provides the validation data necessary for this development step and compares new experimental data with simulations of the different flame conditions using the mechanism of Janbazi et al.
METHOD
The formation of main flame species (H2, O2, H2O, Ar, O) and the decomposition of the precursor to intermediate species e.g. TMS, Si(CH3)3(CH2)OO, SiO2, Si(OH)4, Si4O10H4, CO2, CO are monitored in laminar H2/O2/Ar low pressure flames by means of molecular beam mass spectrometry (MBMS). Details on the experiment, the data analysis and uncertainties of the mole fractions can be found in Karakaya et al. and only a brief description is given here. All low pressure flames are stabilized on a matrix burner with a diameter of 36 mm installed in a reactor with a pressure of 30 0.03 mbar. Flame conditions are listed in Table 1. The burner position can be changed in upwards flow direction relative to the quartz sampling probe between HAB 0每 100 mm (HAB, height above burner) with an accuracy of 0.01 mm. A throttle valve maintains the pressure in the reactor chamber at 30 mbar with an accuracy of 0.1%. A molecular beam is formed by extraction of a gas sample from the reactor chamber through a 90 米m orifice in the tip of a conical quartz sampling probe into a second vacuum stage with a pressure of 10?3 mbar. The molecular beam passes through a skimmer with an orifice diameter of 1.2 mm into the ionization chamber of an orthogonal time of flight mass spectrometer (TOF). The nominal kinetic energy of the electrons used for electron ionization is 17 eV in order to detect the major species products (e.g. H2, O2, H2O, TMS, CO2, CO, O, Si species and 70 eV to see silicon containing clusters (e.g. Si4O10H4) with low concentrations in the flames. 107 mass spectra are summed to obtain sufficient sensitivity for the detection of mole fractions in the x 10?6 range. Each integrated mass peak is proportional to the mole fraction of the respective species in the gas sample weighted by the ionization efficiency of the substance. The TOF has a resolution of m/ilm 3000 at a mass to charge ratio of m/z 28, which is useful for peaks with near identical m/z. The settings were optimized to see the decomposition of the precursor and the subsequent formation of the most relevant small gaseous clusters below m/z 400. TMS was metered with a syringe pump with an accuracy of 2 vol% and evaporated at 333 K. Thermal mass flow controllers regulate the gas flows with an accuracy of 5%. The inside and the outside of the burner matrix were not coated significantly with SiO2, so it can be concluded that TMS starts to decompose in the flame and a significant change in burner porosity is not expected.
The errors of the presented mole fractions depend on the calibration procedure and range between 15% for major species (O2, H2, H2O), 30每 60% for minor intermediate species and TMS, and a factor of two for flame radicals (e.g. O) and silicon containing intermediates. The temperature profiles of flames AH were measured with a thermocouple and are radiation corrected according to the method of Bahlawane et al. The uncertainty of the temperature measurement is evaluated to be 100 K. Additionally, the relative perturbed temperature profile is evaluated from the temperature dependence of the argon signal as described by Struckmeier et al. These temperature profiles include the influence of the nozzle and will be used for the simulations of flames A每H. Synthesized particles are collected from a filter in the exhaust line of the flame reactor under ambient conditions after a sequence of experiments with different equivalence ratio in order to characterize the particle morphology. Nanoparticles are mechanically deposited onto copper TEM grids with lacey carbon films without any solvents. Investigations are performed using a JEOL JEM2200FS TEM instrument and ImageJ software to obtain the nanoparticle size distribution by analysis of measured diameters of more than 500 particles from the sample. The x ray diffraction pattern is obtained using a P analytical XP? ert Pro diffractometer.
For the simulations of flames AH, the detailed reaction mechanism together with transport and thermodynamic properties published by Janbazi et al. is used for one dimensional simulations of the low pressure laminar flames with the measured perturbed temperature profiles (see Fig. 1a) using Cantera and ChemKin Pro 19.2. ChemKin Pro 19.2 is used for the detailed re action flow analyses.
RESULT and DISCUSSION
Figure 1a compares the temperature profiles of the doped and the undoped flames with different equivalence ratios. The maximum temperature is almost identical in the neat and doped flames of identical equivalence ratio, but the temperatures in the reaction zone are about 100 K higher. The temperature decrease in the exhaust gas is less pronounced in the doped flames. Both observations, can be explained by exothermic reactions of TMS oxidation close to the burner and exothermic hydrolysis re actions of silicon containing intermediates in the exhaust gas. Fig. 1(b每f) shows measured and simulated main species profiles for the systematic change of equivalence ratios (?) between is included. The simulated and measured mole fraction profiles of the main species H2, O2, H2O are in a very good agreement. Small deviations occur close to the burner surface. These can be traced for all species to the influence of the burner sur face and the quartz probe on the flame structure as discussed before, e.g., in a study of Deng et al. The hydrogen and oxygen are consumed in the reaction zone of the flame and reach equilibrium values around HAB 15 mm in all flames. Water also reaches an equilibrium value at the same HAB. TMS is consumed completely at HAB 10 mm (see Fig. 1f). As a consequence, the TMS consumption occurs at very different flame conditions for the flames of different equivalence ratios. The oxygen mole fraction is approximately 50% higher, the hydrogen mole fraction is 30% lower, and the water mole fraction differs by 40% between the flames with ? 0.6 and ? 1.2 in the TMS destruction region. The profiles of the other equivalence ratios fall between the profiles of the flames with the largest and smallest equivalence ratio. The flame temperatures rise at HAB 10 mm to 1000 K for all doped flames. It can be observed that the addition of TMS shifts all main species profiles closer to the burner surface as a result of the temperature rise in the reaction zone. Deviations between simulation and experiment concerning TMS are extensively discussed in the work of Janbazi et al]. In summary, the decomposition steps of TMS are estimated by analogy to the hydrocarbon chemistry of neopentane and were not optimized against the experimental profiles during model development. Also, probing effects can affect the flow field and temperature field. This results in widening the flame front and cooling the flame close to the sampling probe. The effect of the sampling probe on the flame temperature and the resulting changes to the flame structure are tentatively shown in the Supplementary Material Fig. S3. Figure 2 shows the measured and simulated mole fraction profiles of the oxygen radicals in the reported flames. The measured O radical profiles have comparatively large uncertainties and exhibit more noise than the profiles of other intermediates because the small radicals OH and O are often lost in the sampling process. According to the simulation the oxygen radical is involved in many re actions with intermediate species of TMS. As expected, the mole fraction of the O radical is higher at lean than at rich flame conditions. Compared to flame B it decreases by 20%, 38%, 55% in the exhaust gas of flames D, F, and H, respectively.  For all equivalence ratios, the maximum O radical mole fraction is reached downstream of the point of complete decomposition of TMS and is followed by a slow consumption of O radicals in the exhaust gas. The deviations in the O consumption rates between doped and undoped flames can be traced by reaction path analyses and sensitivity analyses to the reaction between CO and O forming CO2. The model overpredicts this difference for the lean conditions
Most likely, either the dependence of this re action on the equivalence ratio is not accurately captured in the model or reactions with silicon containing species, which are not included in the model, contribute markedly to the consumption of O radicals under lean conditions.
The comparison of measured and simulated TMS profiles in Fig. 1f reveals significant deviations. The simulated mole fraction profiles show a convex down behavior and the experiments a convex up behavior, for all equivalence ratios. The difference in profile shape can be explained by the effect of the sampling probe on the flow and temperature field of the flame. In addition, the simulations predict a much faster TMS destruction than observed in the experiments, that was also observed in the original reaction mechanism development work. TMS destruction is dominated by hydrogen abstraction reactions from TMS by O, H and OH radicals as can be seen from the rate of production analysis (ROP) in Fig. 3. ROP analyses were performed at HAB 1 mm, 2.5 mm and 6 mm. The rate coefficient for the hydrogen abstraction from TMS by H radicals is among the few rate coefficients in the Si/C/H/O system that has been accurately measured by Peukert et al. The rate coefficients for the hydrogen abstraction by other radicals have been estimated with reasonable ac curacy based on analogies of H abstraction from neopentane. These reaction rates were not changed in the reaction mechanism optimization. The reactions with OH and H radicals contribute strongly to the decomposition of TMS for equivalence ratios investigated here, while the reaction with O radicals plays only a minor role. The importance of the H abstraction by H radicals increases with increasing equivalence ratios in agreement with the larger H radical mole fractions, while importance of the reaction with OH radicals is unaffected. The fact that the overestimation of the reaction rate of TMS in the experiments is also independent of the flame conditions, e.g., independent of mole fractions of O, H and OH radicals, suggests that the discrepancies in the TMS consumption rate are most likely linked to the H abstraction reaction by OH radicals. Figure 1e presents measured and simulated mole fraction profiles of the CO2 and CO formed during oxidation of the TMS. The carbon mono x ide profiles peak around HAB 10 mm, so at the same HAB where all TMS is consumed. In all flames, the CO is further oxidized to CO2 reach ing equilibrium values close to 2400 ppm. Carbon is only introduced into the gas mixture by the TMS addition (2400 ppm). From the carbon balance, it is evident that all carbon is converted to CO and subsequently CO2 at high HAB, which is desirable in the synthesis of ultrapure silicon oxide particles. The simulation reproduces the measured CO2 and CO mole fraction profiles quite well, but deviations appear close to the burner due probe perturbations. Deviations between measured and simulated CO2 mole fractions at higher distances are slightly larger than the expected error limit of 15%. They can be explained by a stream stall of the one dimensional flow field leading to a source for further perturbations.
The comparison of the experimental and simulated mole fraction values demonstrates that the reaction mechanism reproduces the overall flame chemistry with and without addition of TMS well. This is a prerequisite for further analysis and interpretation of observations using the simulations.
Figure 4 shows two reaction path analyses at HAB 10 mm and HAB 20 mm for ? 1 at temperatures of 1013 K and 1250 K. They show that only the relative importance of the reaction path ways changes with HAB, while the active pathways are identical. Similar reaction pathways were found for all equivalence ratios.
Since Si(CH3)3CH2 could not be detected,  the first experimentally observed silicon containing intermediate at all equivalence ratios is Si(CH3)3CH2OO. This species may be a peroxide or one of its more stable isomers. In the reaction mechanism the peroxide Si(CH3)3CH2OO is produced by O2 addition to the initially formed TMS radical. The maxima of the mole fraction profiles of Si(CH3)3CH2OO move to slightly larger distances from the burner with decreasing equivalence ratio. This trend and the absolute mole fraction profiles shown in Fig. 5 are in good agreement between experiment and simulation, and in accord with the shifts i the temperature profiles (Fig. 1a). Also, the mole fraction of Si(CH3)3CH2OO increases with increasing amount of O2. For all equivalence ratios, Si(CH3)3CH2OO is completely consumed at around 700 K. Other silicon intermediate species, e.g., OSi(CH3)3, Si(CH3)3OH, Si(OH)3 appear in the reaction zone as it is postulated in the reaction pathway in Fig. 4.
Figure 6a reports measured and simulated mole fraction profiles of SiO2, Si(OH)4, Si4O10H4 that are important intermediates of particle formation in the reaction pathway in Fig. 4. These species are formed from the initial intermediates and peak at HAB 10 mm. According to the reaction mechanism, two distinct pathways lead to the formation of silica nanoparticles. The first pathway forms SiO, which condenses to SiO2 nanoparticles. Condensation of Si(OH)4 to larger clusters such as Si4O10H4 which in turn form silica nanoparticles constitutes the second pathway.
The measured and simulated mole fraction pro files of SiO2 in Fig. 6a have their maxima near HAB 10 mm at 1000 K. SiO2 is consumed slowly in the exhaust gas. The maximum mole fractions of SiO2 decrease with increasing equivalence ratio and reach the detection limit in the richest flame H. The simulations predict the measured profiles within the accuracy of the data. According to the reaction path analysis at ? 1 and HAB 10 mm SiO2 is mainly formed by the reaction SiO O2 SiO2 O, so consequently less SiO2 is formed with increasing equivalence ratio because less oxygen is available in the exhaust. It is conceivable that as a consequence more SiO could react to nanoparticles.
Figure 6b presents measured and simulated mole fraction profiles of Si(OH)4. The simulation captures the measurements within the absolute un certainties of the data. Species like Si(OH)4 are quantified using estimated ionization efficiencies and have large absolute uncertainties of a factor of two. In addition, the model was optimized in the work of Janbazi et al., to fit the absolute mole fractions in flame B, so that a good match of experiment and simulation is expected. When comparing profiles from different equivalence ratios, the uncertainties in the ionization efficiency can be neglected because they will shift the mole fraction values in the same direction.
At the maximum of the Si(OH)4 profiles at ap proximately HAB 10 mm, the experimental mole fractions of the cluster Si4O10H4 are about 40% lower in flame B (?  0.6) compared to flame H (? 1.2), reflecting the decrease in the respective Si(OH)4 profiles quantitatively. This observation confirms, that independent of the equivalence ratio of the flame the formation of Si4O10H4 is linked directly to Si(OH)4.
In conclusion, the model describes the effect of equivalence ratio on important species in the particle formation path correctly and can be used to estimate the relative importance of both pathways as a function of equivalence ratio.
The nanoparticles can be formed either via the SiO or via the Si4H10O4cluster route shown in Fig. 4. According to a rate of production analysis at ? 1 at HAB 10 mm, the ROP of nanoparticles by the SiO pathway is 105 time higher than the ROP by the cluster pathway. At HAB 20 mm the cluster pathway is more important with a 104 times higher ROP. This observation indicates that the pathway for the formation of nanoparticles changes within the flame with increasing HAB. The relative importance of both pathways in the complete synthesis process is estimated by comparison of the integrated ROP for both routes over all HAB. This analysis shows that 97% of the particles are formed via the SiO route and 3% are formed via the Si4O10H4 cluster route.
Compared to the study of hydrocarbon systems the investigation of inorganic nanoparticle formation in flames is considerably more difficult, e.g., due to the lack of any prior knowledge of the species occurring in theses flames, unknown species properties and the more rapid particle formation which presents a technical challenge. Consequently, the presented data are state of theart but do not reach the accuracy that can be achieved in hydrocarbon systems. The study presented here is the only systematic speciation study of the Si/H/O system reaching this level of chemical detail in the literature. As a result, the chemical reaction mechanism trained on these data is currently an ※engineering model§ with a majority of optimized rate constants [11]. However, the change in nanoparticle formation pathways observed is significant and outside the error margin.
If a change in particle formation pathways occurs as function of equivalence ratio, this effect should be evident in the synthesized nanoparticles. The particle sizes could not be determined online in the experiment described here, but the particle properties were investigated with offline techniques. Silica powders are collected after a series of measurements with the three flames D, F and H of different equivalence ratio. Consequently, the powders are a mixture of the nanoparticles produced with different oxygen flows. 8 TEM images are used and 511 particles are counted to obtain a representative and statistically significant nanoparticle size distribution. Figure 7 shows a particle size distribution of silica nanoparticles. A lognormal fit of the data clearly shows a bimodal size distribution with two fractions of particles with mean diameters of
46.7 nm and 158 nm.
Changes to the size distribution have previously been observed in flame synthesis by Akurati et al.
who measured the BET based nanoparticle diameter of silicon oxides depending on the oxygen flow rate. The inset of Fig. 7 shows a representative TEM micrograph of the spherical particles. The amorphous lattice of the particles is supported by a Xray diffraction investigation with a broad feature at 25∼ 2牟 typically for amorphous SiO2 (see Supplemental Figs. S1 and S2).
The data support the observation that the equivalence ratio seems to affect the final particle size but not the particle structure. The flame data of ferseveral possible explanations for the observed effect. On the one hand, the different particle sizes may be related to the different particle formation pathways. On the other hand, the changes in the mole fractions of the radicals in the exhaust gas may lead to different growth patterns of the initially formed nanoparticles. These open questions will be addressed in future research.
CONCLUSION
This work investigates the influence of the equivalence ratio of H2/O2/Ar synthesis flames on the reaction pathways of tetramethyl silane, inter mediates and nanoparticles. Mole fraction profiles of the most important species are compared to simulations with a reaction mechanism for TMS combustion from literature. The results demonstrate that the reaction mechanism can be improved by more accurate rate coefficients for the hydrogen abstraction by OH radicals from TMS, and by inclusion of reactions of silicon containing species with the flame radicals in the exhaust gas. Nevertheless, the reaction mechanism reproduces the experimental data with satisfactory accuracy for all equivalence ratios. In particular, it is shown that two nanoparticle formation pathways are active at all equivalence ratios and that they may lead to different particle size distributions. The data set can be further used to improve reaction kinetics in the Si/C/H/O system.
