         Dropwise condensation theory revisited Part II. Droplet nucleation density and condensation heat flux

Abstract  
    An improved dropwise condensation heat transfer model modified from previous models is proposed in this paper. The critical radius for onset of droplet condensation is determined in the preceding paper (Part I), leading to a more accurate determination of droplet nucleation density and the coalescence radius in this paper (Part II). Effects of subcooling, contact angle, thickness and thermal conductivity of the coating layer on droplet nucleation density, condensation heat flux, and critical condensation heat transfer rate for onset of droplet condensation are illustrated. The predicted droplet nucleation density and dropwise condensation heat flux are shown in excellent agreement with existing experimental data.

Introduction
    The study of dropwise condensation heat transfer has attracted a great deal of attention since Schmidt performed his experiment on dropwise condensation heat transfer in 1930. Le Fevre and Rose developed the first dropwise condensation heat transfer model in 1966, in which the average condensation heat transfer was obtained by an analysis for heat transfer through a single droplet combined with the drop size distribution. In this single droplet model, three thermal resistances including conduction resistance, vapor liquid interfacial resistance and surface resistance were considered in series. Wu and Maa obtained an expression for calculation of dropwise condensation heat transfer by dividing the droplets into two groups: small droplets before coalescence and large droplets after coalescence; they used a population balance model to obtain drop size distribution of small droplets before coalescence which grow mainly by direct condensation. Abu-Oriba improved Wu and Maa¡¯s model by taking account of the thermal resistance of promoter coating based on a single droplet heat transfer model given by Le Fevre and Rose. A dropwise model similar to Abu-Oriba was recently proposed by Kim and Kim, who included the effect of contact angle on heat conduction in a single droplet. Although Kim and Kim¡¯s model for dropwise condensation heat transfer is a most comprehensive dropwise condensation model, it has a few short- comings: (i) the critical radius was determined from the critical radius for classical heterogeneous droplet nucleation condensation, which did not take into consideration effects of contact angle and coating layer, (ii) the value of droplet nucleation density is, and (iii) the model is unable to predict the critical heat transfer for onset of dropwise condensation.
    In this paper, we propose an improved dropwise condensation model which is based on the modification of Kim and Kim¡¯s model by using the more accurate expression for the critical radius for onset of droplet condensation  derived  in the  preceding paper to determine (i) the minimum droplet nucleation radius and  (ii)  the droplet nucleation density. Effects of contact angle, degree of subcooling, contact angle hysteresis, thickness and thermal conductivity of the coating layer and the saturated vapor pressure on dropwise condensation heat flux are analyzed. The predicted droplet nucleation density and dropwise condensation  heat flux are shown in excellent agreement with existing experimental data.

Previous models for dropwise condensation
    In this section, we will briefly review previous models for dropwise condensation on a subcooled surface. Wu and Maa assumed that droplets condense on a subcooled surface can be divided into two groups: a group of small size droplets (with radius from rmin to re) having a number density n(r), and a group of large size droplets (with radius from re to rmax) having a number density N(r) and gave the following expression for dropwise condensation heat transfer: where rmin is the minimum droplet radius, re is the coalescence radius, and qdrop is the heat transfer rate through a single droplet given by Kim and Kim as where h is the contact angle; d is the thickness of the coating; hcont is its thermal conductivity, and hi is the interfacial heat transfer coefficient is given by where a is the accommodation coefficient. Graham and Griffith assumed the minimum radius rmin of the droplets to be equal to the critical radius r0, which can be obtained from the classical heterogeneous droplet nucleation theory as. where DTsub = Ts-Tw is the degree of subcooling with Ts being the saturated temperature of the vapor; ql is the liquid condensate density, and rlv is liquid vapor surface tension, and hfg is the latent heat. It should be noted that Eq. (2a) has taken into consideration of the thermal resistances of the promoter, the liquid vapor interface, and the curvature depression of the equilibrium interface temperature. In the first integral of Eq. (1), n(r) is the drop size distribution of small droplets with radius from r0 to re, which is given by. The lower limit of the first integral is the critical radius rmin for droplet nucleation, and the upper limit in the first integral is the. Coalescence radius r is given by. Rose has derived a theoretical expression for droplet nucle- ation density which is given by. Where rmin = r0 is in all previous models. Although Eq. (4b) was derived in 1976, it has seldom been used in practice since Eq. (4b)  is known to be overestimating the droplet nucleation sites if rmin =  r0, where r0 is given by Eq. (2c). On the other hand, experimental values of droplet nucleation density Ns were found in the range from 109 m2 to 1015 m2, and this value was used in previous dropwise condensation models. In the second integral of Eq. (1), N(r) is the number density of large drops with radius from re to rmax which is given by. where rmax is maximum drop radius, which can be obtained according to the force balance between surface tension and gravity as with hr being the receding contact angle and has the advancing contact angle. Eqs. (1)-(5) with rmin=r0 is Kim and Kim¡¯s model for dropwise condensation heat transfer. It should be noted that the critical condensation heat flux from  Eq. (2a)  gives qdrop ro=0,  which is unrealistic since the critical heat flux is not equal to zero for bubble nucleation

The improved dropwise condensation model
    As mentioned earlier, we now propose an improved dropwise condensation model which differs from Kim and Kim¡¯s model in two aspects: the evaluation of (i) the critical radius for onset of droplet nucleation and (ii) the droplet nucleation density Ns, which will now be discussed. And the critical radius for onset of heterogeneous dropwise condensation rc is obtained by submitting Eq. (2a) with qdrop to Eq.(6a) and letting
where the value of the critical radius rc can be obtained numerically. The results of critical radius for nucleation of droplet condensation are presented in Part I in details, where effects of contact angles,degree of subcooling, thickness and thermal conductivity of the coating layer, and saturated pressure are discussed.
The condensation heat transfer rate at the onset of droplet condensation qdropercT can be obtained from Eq. (2a) by substituting r=rc to give where hi is given by Eq. (2b) with a=0.3 being chosen for computation in this paper. Eq shows that: and qdrop is not zero in the present model because latent heat is released when droplet is formed and heat is transferred from droplet to the subcooled wall. It is interesting to note that for h = 0(a superhydrophilic surface), rc=r0 and therefore i.e, film condensation occurs on a superhydrophilic
r is computed for different contact angles, subcooled degrees, coating thickness and thermal conductivity of the coating and the results are presented in Fig. 1. Fig. 1(a) shows the effect of contact angle on critical condensation heat flux at the onset of droplet condensation. It is shown that (i) the critical condensation heat flux qdrop (rc) is small at small contact angles (i.e., on hydrophilic surfaces), (ii) qdrop (rc) increases as the contact angle becomes larger. The latter is because rc increases at larger contact angle (see Fig. 5 in Part I). As a result, we can see that the numerator of Eq. (7) increases, and this effect will play the major role. Similarly,  rc  becomes larger at lower subcooled degrees (Fig. 1(b)), bigger coating thickness (Fig. 1(c)), and lower thermal conductivity of coating (Fig. 1(d)), and under these conditions, qdrop(rc) given by Eq.(7) will also increase.
    As mentioned earlier, Eq. (4b) is known to be overestimating  the droplet nucleation sites if r0 is given by Eq. (2c).This implies that r0 given by Eq. (2c) may be too small especially when the subcooled surface has a coating layer. In this paper, we propose  that the analytical expression by Rose for droplet nucleation density Ns given by Eq. (4b) is to be calculated according to. where rc is the critical radius for onset of heterogeneous droplet nucleation given by Eq. (6), which has taken into consideration effects of contact angle, the thickness and thermal  conductivity  of a coating layer and liquid vapor interfacial thermal resistances. Effects of contact angle, the thickness and thermal conductivity of the coating layer on droplet nucleation density based on  Eq.(8) are presented in Fig.2. It can be seen from this figure that the values of the droplet nucleation density computed from Eq. (8) are in the same order of magnitude as those obtained from experimental observation. This confirms the validity of Eq. (8) indirectly. Fig.2(a) shows the effect of contact angles on droplet nucleation density on surfaces without a coating layer is small except on a subcooled surface having a large contact angle and at small degrees of subcooling. It is shown that the droplet nucleation density decreases as the contact angle increases. At large contact angles, the droplet nucleation radius become large, indicating that the onset of droplet condensation is more difficult to occur. Conse- quently, the number of activated condensation sites decreases. For large degree of subcooling, the nucleation potential aggrandizes,the radius of condensation droplets becomes smaller and more droplet nucleation sites are activated. It should be noted that for contact angle smaller than 90¡ã, droplet nucleation density curves shown in Fig. 2(a) are close with each other. This is because the droplet nucleation radius for h < 90¡ã is close to each other, which was explained in the preceding paper. Fig. 2(b) shows the effect of contact angle on droplet nucleation density on a coating layer having a thickness of d = 0.1 lm and a thermal conductivity  kcoat = 0.25 W/m-K. A comparison of Fig. 2(a) and (b) shows that addition of a coating layer decreases the droplet nucleation density greatly. Effects of thickness and thermal conductivity of coating layers on droplet nucleation density is presented in Fig. 2(c) and (d), respectively. The results show that droplet nucleation density decreases on a thicker coat- ing layer with a smaller thermal conductivity.
    The proposed improved model for dropwise condensation heat transfer rate is given by Eq. (1) with qdrop given by Eq. (2a) with rmin being replaced by rc, i.e., where n(r) and N(r) are given by Eqs. (3a) and (5a) respectively with rmin being replaced by rc, the critical radius rc determined from Eq. (6b), the coalescence radius re determined from Eq. (4a) and with droplet nucleation density Ns determined from Eq.(8), respectively. Fig. 3 is a comparison of the predicated condensation heat transfer based on the improved dropwise condensation model with existing experimental data obtained by different investigators. Since information on the contact angle was not reported in their experimental data, three contact angles (h=60¡ã, 90¡ã and 120¡ã) were chosen for computations in the proposed model and the results are compared with the experimental data. In compari- son with the present theory, the mean absolute percentage error of the experimental data are 34.8%, 17.9% and 21.9% if the contact angle of  h=60¡ã, 90¡ã, or 120¡ã, were used for computation respectively. Fig. 4 shows the effect of contact angle on the predicted drop- wise condensation heat flux  at a specific degree of subcooling of 4 ¡ãC. It can be seen that the condensation heat flux firstly increases with the contact angle to a maximum value at about h=120¡ã and then decreases afterward. This behavior with respect to h can be seen from the three terms in downstairs of Eq. (2a) for a hydrophilic surface (h < 90¡ã) and a hydrophobic surfaces (h > 90¡ã) respectively. For a hydrophilic surface (h < 90¡ã), all of the three terms decrease with the contact angle, and thus, the condensation heat flux increases with the contact angle. For a hydrophobic surface (h > 90¡ã), heat transfer rate qdrop decreases because the  increase in first two terms (i.e., thermal resistance of coating, and conduction in the droplet) in downstairs is larger than the decrease of the third term (i.e., the interfacial thermal resistance) and consequently the condensation heat flux decreases. For the above reason, Fig. 4 shows that an optimal contact angle exists for max- imum dropwise condensation heat flux for a given degree of subcooling. The contact angle hysteresis, defined as ha hr, also influences dropwise condensation heat flux because it affects the movement of the droplet. With small contact angle hysteresis, the maximum drop radius decreases as shown in Eq. (5b), suggesting that droplets are easier to move. The effect of contact angle hysteresis on dropwise condensation is given in Fig. 5. In the calculation, the receding contact angle hr and advancing contact angle ha is estimated as. Fig. 5 shows that condensation heat flux is much larger at low contact angle hysteresis than at high contact angle hysteresis. Fig. 6 shows the effect of contact angle on dropwise condensa- tion heat flux on subcooled surfaces having a coating with thick- ness  d = 0.1 lm  and  thermal  conductivity  kcoat = 0.25 W/m-K. It can be seen that the dropwise condensation heat flux firstly increases with the contact angle, then decreases for hydrophobic surfaces, a trend similar to Fig. 4 (without a coating). It is shown from Fig.6 that the maximum condensation heat flux occurs at about h = 90¡ã with a promoter coating, which is smaller  than at h= 120¡ã on a surface without a coating layer as shown in Fig. 4. This is because the first term (i.e., thermal resistance ofcoating) in Eq. (7) decreases for 0 < h < 90¡ã  but  increases for 90¡ã < h < 180¡ã, leading to the shift of optimum contact angle to be smaller from h = 120¡ã to h = 90¡ã at maximum qdrop. Fig.7 shows the effect of thicknesses and thermal conductivities of the coating surface on condensation heat transfer. The results show that thermal resistance increases with a thick coating surface having a low thermal conductivity, so that dropwise condensation heat flux is reduced under such situations. Fig. 8 shows the effect of saturated pressures on predicted dropwise condensation heat flux on subcooled surfaces without a coating layer at h = 90¡ã. It can be seen that dropwise condensation heat flux increases with the saturated pressure. This is because the nucleation radius is smaller at higher saturated pressures as shown in the preceding paper. When the nucleation radius is small, the nucleation density is high, so dropwise condensation heat flux increases at high saturated pressures.
Fig. 9 shows that predicted condensation heat fluxes are in good agreement with Stylianou and Rose¡¯s experimental data at different saturated pressures. The contact angle of h = 90¡ã was chosen for computation in this model because the contact angle was not reported in their paper.

Concluding remarks
     In this paper, an improved model is proposed for dropwise condensation heat flux on a subcooled surface with coatings, where embryo droplet nucleation radius and droplet nucleation density are evaluated differently from existing models. This improved model differs from Kim and Kim model in two important aspects: (i) the droplets nucleation radius is evaluated from the preceding paper instead of the critical radius given by Eq. (2c). (ii) The droplet nucleation density is calculated from the analytical expression given by Rose with the critical radius computed from the preceding paper instead of experimental values. Effects of contact angle, degree of subcooling, contact angle hysteresis, thickness and thermal conductivity of promoter coating layer as well as saturated pressure on dropwise condensation heat transfer are presented. The following conclusions can be drawn from this paper:
     An analytical expression for critical condensation heat transfer rate at onset of dropwise condensation is obtained in this paper for the first time. At a given degree of subcooling, this condensation heat transfer rate increases with the contact angle.
    The validity of Rose¡¯s analytical expression for droplet nucleation density is confirmed by a more accurate calculation of critical radius for onset of dropwise condensation, with effects of coating, interfacial temperature drop, and curvature depression of equilibrium interface temperature taken into consideration.
    Increasing degree of subcooling within certain limits can diminish embryo droplet nucleation radius, magnifying droplet nucleation density and increasing the dropwise condensation heat flux.
    The dropwise condensation heat flux increases with the contact angle of hydrophilic surfaces at first, then decreases at high contact angles of hydrophilic surfaces. An optimal contact angle for dropwise condensation heat transfer exists for a given degree of subcooling.
    Although a hydrophobic coating layer can enhance dropwise condensation heat transfer, it also introduces an extra thermal resistance to the condensation heat transfer process. A thin hydrophobic coating layer with a high thermal conductivity can aggrandize droplet nucleation density and enhance dropwise condensation heat transfer greatly.
    Both the condensation heat flux and droplet nucleation density increase at higher saturation pressures.