  it was shown that vortex shedding from a rotationally oscillating cylinder at moderate Reynolds number can be characterized by the spatial coexistence of two distinct patterns, one of which is related to the forcing frequency in the near wake and the other to frequency close to the natural one for the unforced case downstream of this locked region. The existence and the modiﬁcation of these wake characteristics were found to be strongly aﬀected by the frequency and the amplitude of the cylinder oscillation. f o s  In this paper, a linear stability analysis of these forced regimes is performed, and shows that the stability characteristics of such flows are governed by a strong mean flow correction which is a function of the oscillation parameters. We also present experiments on the spatial properties of the global mode and on the selection of b  the vortex shedding frequency as a function of the forcing conditions for Re = 150. m a  Finally, we elucidate a diagram of locked and non-locked states, for a large range of t  frequencies and amplitudes of the oscillation. o t t c e j b u s , 9 4 : 7 5 : 2 1  1. Introduction t a 0 2  Thiria, Goujon-Durand  & Wesfreid (2006) investigated experimentally the flow 0 2 t  over a cylinder performing rotary oscillations at moderate Reynolds number. Under c O 0  forcing conditions, it was observed that vortices were shed at the forcing frequency 1 n o ,  in the near wake and can merge downstream from each row to give a new pattern is similar to the one that can be observed for the unforced case. The wake dynamics was found to be strongly aﬀected by the forcing parameters (the frequency and the amplitude of the cylinder oscillation). The far-wake region exhibits slightly diﬀerent dynamics of the uctuations than observed in the free case. Similar observations have o a i J i  been made by Lu & Sato (1996), Chou (1997) and Choi, Choi & Kang (2002) in a h g  numerical simulations in the case of a rotary oscillating cylinder, but also in the case n a h  of a translating oscillating cylinder as in the experiments performed by Nishihara, S .  Kanedo & Watanabe (2005). However, Thiria et al. (2006) were only focusing on the o c relation between the wake pattern and the drag on the cylinder and none of the otherstudies on this subject addressed the mechanism responsible for the modiﬁcation of g 4 d 0 i 0 r b 7 the wake dynamics. The stability properties of bluﬀ body wakes have been extensively investigated in recent years. It is well known that when the Reynolds number is bigger than, the wake of a cylindrical cylinder undergoes self-sustained oscillations; this is the Benard–von Karman instability. In this supercritical regime, the properties of m these synchronized  open flows are strongly dependent  on the Reynolds number. Experimentally, the relationship between the Strouhal frequency of the vortex shedding and the Reynolds number was established long ago by Camichel, Dupin & ´ ´ Teissie-Solier (1927) and Benard (1928) and more recently by, for example, Provansal, Mathis & Boyer (1987) and Williamson (1988). Goujon-Durand, Jenﬀer & Wesfreid . s (1994), Zielinska & Wesfreid (1995) and Wesfreid, Goujon-Durand & Zielinska (1996) investigated the spatial shape of this global structure and established scaling laws for t / e r the amplitude and location of the maximum of the global mode for a large range of r Reynolds number above the threshold. From a theoretical point of view, the study of the global dynamics of synchronized spatially developing flows is based on the analysis of the complex local absolute m a c frequency ω which depends on the streamwise coordinate. For normal modesgrowing proportionally to, where ω0 and k0 are respectively the complex absolute frequency and complex absolute wavenumber with zero group velocity, s p t t if Im(ω ) = ω >0 the flow is said to be locally absolutely unstable (AU); the h  0 0i t a e perturbations  grow in situ and overrun the whole flow. On the other hand, if l b a l Im(ω ) = ω <0, the flow is considered locally convectively unstable (CU); the  perturbations  are ampliﬁed but advected by the oncoming  flow. It is now well e s u known that open flows giving rise to self-sustained (or global) oscillations exhibit a f o s ﬁnite region of absolute instability near the bluﬀ body and are convectively unstable m r e downstream (for x > x ). The relationship between global wake frequency and local t  ac e r o absolute instability is then determinated from local resonance principles. Koch (1985) C e conjectured that the local resonance responsible for the frequency adopted by the b whole flow prevails at the downstream location x (ω = ω (x )) while Pierrehumbert ac ac 0 ac m a (1984) proposed that this resonance is dictated by the local eigenvalue with the m t maximum imaginary part (located at x ). More recently, a linear criterion for the o t t selection of global frequencies based on local absolute stability characteristics of the c e j b flow has been given by Chomaz, Huerre & Redekopp (1991) and Le Dizes et al. (1996). u s , 9 The local frequency prevailing for the whole wake is given by a saddle-point condition 4 : 7 5 based on the analytic continuation of ω (x ) in the x -plane given by ω  = ω (x ) with : 0  s 0 s 2 1 t dω /dx(x ) = 0. a 0  s 0 2 These criteria are all based on local properties of the flow, but one can note 0 2 t however that the global frequency can also be calculated by perturbing the whole c O 0 two-dimensional flow ﬁeld directly (see for example Barkley, Gomes & Henderson 1 n o,  2002). While these methods can provide very accurate results in open flows, they cannot give local stability properties which are of great importance for the physical understanding of such flows. n U g n o  1.1. Stability analysis and forced flow T o a i J i Stability analysis requires knowledge of the basic state of the flow being considered. a h g In our case (the cylinder performs rotary oscillations) and more generally for forced n a h systems, the basic flow is modiﬁed by the non-stationary characteristics of the forcing. As was noted by Pier (2002), the linear global frequencies ω  , ω and ω and ω o ac max obtained from the basic flow analysis cannot account for the real global frequency 8 selected by the wake. From his results (see ﬁgure 1), the criterion giving a good g 4 d 0 i 0 r b 7 frequency prediction for the fully developed  vortex street was obtained from a m 0 0 a 2 c 1 stability analysis applied on the time-averaged mean flow instead of the unperturbed . basic flow, using the frequency ωs . This is not the ﬁrst time that a linear criterion applied to the mean flow has turned out to be the best for the prediction of theactual global frequency in bluﬀ body wakes (see Mattingly & Criminale 1972 or Triantafyllou, Triantafyllou & Chryssostomidis 1986). More recently, Hammond Redekopp (1997), found in the case of the wake of a blunt-edged plate, that the Stability properties of forced wakes. Figure 1. Evolution of the global selected frequency in the wake of a circular cylinder as function of the Reynolds number. , Frequency obtained by direct numerical simulation f o s  (DNS); —, experimental results (from Williamson 1988). Results (ωs ) represented by  have m r  been obtained by applying the linear criterion xs on the time-averaged mean flow. , The same calculation applied to the unperturbed basic flow. From Pier (2002) saddle-point theory applied to the mean flow provided an accurate prediction of the m a C e frequency selected by the system. But even though the averaged mean flow does not obey the stationary Navier– t t c Stokes equation, it seems that it takes into account the nonlinear mean flow correction e j b u and plays the role of a new basic state for the development of linear modes, as was s , 9 4  conjectured by Thiria (2005), and discussed in Thiria, Bouchet & Wesfreid (2007a ) : 7 5 : and Barkley (2006). In this paper, we study the mean flow corrections induced by the 2 1 t a forcing. Once these mean flow modiﬁcations are obtained, a stability analysis of such forced flows will be performed using experimentally measured velocity ﬁelds of forced wakes. From this linear stability analysis, we obtain, for the ﬁrst time, the phase diagram of locked states, and we can establish the boundaries between the regions of o ,  global stability and instability. Thus, we contribute to the physical understanding of y t i s r forced flows and conﬁrm the fundamental role played by the mean flow in the wake e v i n stability properties. Experimental set-up Description of the hydrodynamic tunnel and experimental method The experiments  have been performed  in a low-velocity  water tunnel with −1 g 10 cm × 10 cm  cross-section. The typical velocity is 3 cm s The circular cylinder has a diameter d = 0.5 cm which corresponds  for our typical velocity U to a Reynolds number Re = U0 d/ν = 150. This cylinder is mounted  on a submerged m 0 0 a 2 c 1 electrical computer-controlled motor. A detailed description of this set-up can be . w 1 2 w 2 found in Thiria et al. (2006). The wake visualizations  were obtained  in the (x, y )-plane using laserinduced fluorescence (LIF) (see ﬁgure 2). Velocity ﬁelds in the near wake (−1d < x < 8d, −3d < y < 3d ) in the same (x, y )-plane were obtained using standard particle image velocimetry (PIV) by LaVision using a 16 × 16 interrogation window CCD camera .  Hot-film probe visualization Figure 4. Typical flow visualization obtained in the hydrodynamic  tunnel under forcing g 4 condition A = 2, ff /f0 = 4. The vorticies are shed at the forcing frequency on a characteristic ‘lock-in’ length in the near wake and merge from each row to give a new pattern similar to that observed for the unforced case. 2 with an overlap of 50 % which gives a spatial resolution of 22 360 velocity vectors for each ﬁeld obtained. In order to get precise measurements of the spectral content of forced wakes, a hot-ﬁlm probe by DANTEC was introduced into the tunnel (ﬁgure 2). The probe is Stability properties of forced wakes Figure 3. Control parameters of the oscillating motion. free to move in the longitudinal direction x and to diﬀerent streamwise locations. C e g The hot ﬁlm is placed in such a way that it measures the velocity modulus in the (x, y )-plane. The evolution of the spectral content can thus be followed as we move m a C downstream of the cylinder. The sampling frequency is 100 Hz which was suﬃcient e h t for the diﬀerent dynamics observed. 
2.2. Control parameters 
The cylinder is subjected to oscillations following the law (see ﬁgure 3) where ωf is the angular forcing frequency 2 t c O 0  ωf = 2πff . 1 The forcing amplitude is deﬁned as t, is the maximal azimuthal velocity of the forced oscillation. T  max 0 f o a i J We deﬁne f0 as the global frequency of the unforced wake at the same Reynolds i a h number. There are only two non-dimensional forcing parameters, which are deﬁned g n a by A and the ratio f /f . An alternative pair of non-dimensional parameters can h  f be used, namely the ratio of the forcing frequencies and the maximal azimuthal displacement s of the cylinder during the oscillation (s =  dθ = AU /ω f ). For this Reynolds number, the natural frequency of the vortex shedding measured with ther hot ﬁlm was 0.98 Hz. b 7 . Forced wake characteristics We summarize here the global characteristics of the forced flows obtained when the cylinder describes rotary oscillations. A complete experimental study of the diﬀerent flow regimes and their evolution as a function of the forcing parameters can be found ) Natural shedding frequency  Forcing frequency Figure 5. Fourier spectra of the velocity fluctuations as a function of the downstream, distance from the cylinder. The forcing conditions are ff /f0 = 3.5, A = 2 (non-locked regime). Thiria (2005) and Thiria et al. (2006)†. As can be seen in ﬁgure 4 (see page 140), r o the forced wake presents a characteristic pattern: the vortices are ﬁrst shed at the forcing frequency on a characteristic ‘lock-in’ length in the near wake, which grows with the forcing amplitude A and decreases with the forcing frequency. Downstream e from this lock-in region the vortices from each row can merge to give a new pattern similar to the one that can observed for the unforced case. Two diﬀerent dynamical regimes, which are described in the next section, can be distinguished as a function of the forcing parameters. Figure 5 shows the spatial evolution of the Fourier spectra of the velocity fluctuations, 2 0 obtained at y = 0 as a function of the streamwise coordinate. One can observe that fluctuations coming from the forcing (i.e. in the near wake) decrease quickly. The emerging wake exhibits self-sustained oscillations with a sharp front and dissipation downstream. Such typical flow dynamics can be observed for a large range of forcing parameters and the dynamics of the near and far wakes depends strongly on them. This case can be described as non-locked (i.e. only a limited part of the wake fluctuations are synchronized with the forcing frequency.). This kind of spectrum corresponds to the streaklines displayed in ﬁgure 4. However, one can distinguish another forced regime, which diﬀers from the ones described above. This regime, h g n  displayed in ﬁgure 6, can be obtained for low forcing frequencies or/and relatively  high amplitudes. This case can be considered as a locked regime. As seen in ﬁgure 6, the peak related to the forcing frequency decreases quicklyin the near wake without any re-emerging pattern and no characteristic far-wake  frequency. Thus, under forcing the wake can behaves in two distinct ways. In § 4, after studying 0 a 2 c 1 . w 1 the stability of the forced wakes, we predict their properties as a function of the forcing 2 w 2 w 0 parameters. Movies of streaklines visualizations for each pair of forcing parameters used in that paper (0.5 < ff /f0 < 6 and 1 < A < 10) can be found at http://ftp.espci.fr/shadow/thiriaJFM05.Figure 6. Fourier spectra of the velocity fluctuations as a function of the downstream , distance from the cylinder. The forcing conditions are ff /f0 = 3.5, A = 4 (locked regime).. Mean flow correction  In previous works, we were interested in the study of the mean (temporally averaged)  flow modiﬁcations (or the zeroth mode) induced by the presence of fluctuations. For unforced flows, we have studied the spatial distribution of the global mode and also the eﬀect on the recirculation length (Zielinska et al. 1997) and the drag (Protas & Wesfreid 2002). In this paper, especially in § 5, we present for the ﬁrst time, a full experimental study of the evolution of the mean flow as a function of the forcing parameters. The experimental mean ﬁelds were obtained by PIV measurements of 4 : 7  the near wake of the cylinder using a measurement window between x = 0 and x = 8d for diﬀerent forcing conditions. The mean flow was obtained by averaging a nstantaneous velocity ﬁelds. This number of measured ﬁelds, taken at random sampling, was found to be suﬃcient for the convergence of the averaged ﬁeld. One c O 0  of these typical velocity ﬁelds is displayed in ﬁgure 7 for the unforced case. 1 Stability analysis In order to understand the local properties of such flows, we performed a stability o T o  analysis of the wakes modiﬁed by the forcing. Linear stability properties of the measured mean flow were determined by numerical solution of the inviscid Sommerfeld or Rayleigh equation (see Drazin & Reid 1981) for the streamfunction and where U is the local velocity proﬁle depending on the transverse coordinate y, k and ω are respectively the complex wavenumber and the complex pulsation of the perturbation and ψ is the associated / r f g Figure 7. Typical velocity ﬁeld (velocity modulus U/U ) of the mean flow obtained by PIV u 0 f o for the uncontrolled case at Re = 150. In the upper left corner, no velocity can be measured s m due to the shadow of the cylinder created by the laser sheet. Figure 12. Evolution of the mean flow (velocity modulus U/U ) as a function of the forcingamplitude. The forcing frequency is ff /f0 = 5. Stability properties of forced wakes  145  0.5 (a)  0.4 . Figure 8. Results of the stability calculation for two local proﬁles at (a) x = 1d and (b) x = 2.2d taken from the mean flow ﬁeld displayed in ﬁgure 7. The eigenvalue ω0 is identiﬁed at the edge of a cusp-like trajectory. Thus, if the imaginary part of ω0 lies above the real axis, theflow is said to be locally absolutely unstable while it is said to be locally convectively unstable v i n if ω <0. U 0i g n o T o Equation (4.1) deﬁnes an eigenvalue problem and yields the dispersion relation a i J i a h  D(ω, k) = 0  (4.2) g n a h S relating to complex values of ω and k. The absolute frequency ω0 can be computed . where k is speciﬁed by requiring the group velocity to vanish: The modes are discretized using Chebyshev-collocation  points, and a matrix- . eigenvalue problem is recovered which is solved numerically for the dispersion relation.The solutions of the eigenvalue were found following the cusp map procedure describedin Kupfer, Bers & Ram (1987) or Schmid & Henningson (2001). By solving ω(k), the singularity ω  is then identiﬁed at the edge of a typical ‘cusp’-like trajectory. Thus, r /  0 f g r d o e i. if the imaginary part of ω0  lies above the real axis (ﬁgure 8a), the flow is said to be  146 B.  t Figure 9. Evolution of the imaginary (ω0i ) and real part (ω0r ) (growth rate and frequency) of c O 0 the local absolute frequency as a function of the longitudinal coordinate x for the unforced 1 n wake at Re = 150. The vertical dashed line gives the position xac (transition from local absolute, instability (AU) to local convective instability (CU)) and the localization of x (maximum y t i s growth rate). locally absolutely unstable, while it is said to be locally convectively unstable if as shown in ﬁgure 8(b). We investigated the local stability of the averaged flow as has a h g already been successfully applied to an averaged mean flow by Triantafyllou et al. n a h (1986) or Hammond & Redekopp (1997) for the same range of Reynolds numbers. The procedure is repeated for each proﬁle over the whole explored flow ﬁeld (from x = 0 to x = 8d with step of x = 0.05d ). In ﬁgure 9, we display the results of this calculation applied to the mean flow of the unforced case (ﬁgure 7). This ﬁgure shows the imaginary part (absolute growth rate) and real part (absolute frequency) m 0 0 a 2 c 1 of the non-dimensionalized ω as a function of the x -location. As for each flow ﬁelds, .  0 U(x, y ) has been divided by U0  and the transverse coordinate y by d , and the relationbetween ω0r  and frequency can be easily determined from the Strouhal number byω = 2πf d/U  = 2πSt where f indicates the local frequency at location x . h 1 0r  x 0 x . m 0 o 1 As previously noted, the wake exhibits a ﬁnite region of absolute instabilit Table 1. Comparison of theoretical predicted linear frequencies with experimental e j b  measurements at Re = 150. u s , 9 4 : 7 5 : 2 1 t a 0 2 (cf. ﬁgure 7). Farther away, the instability becomes a convective one (ω0i <0 after 0 2 t x > x ). The results for the absolute growth rate displayed in ﬁgure 9 show that the wake is immediately absolutely unstable behind the body and does not exhibit a, transition point from convective to absolute instability. The frequency selection criteria discussed in § 1 can be taken into account and compared to the experimental measured frequency. While the ω and ω criteria can be read directly on ﬁgure 9, the saddle max U point criterion requires the analytical continuation of the complex absolute frequenciesin the complex x -plane. Following Cooper & Crighton (2000), the computed data from the stability calculation displayed in ﬁgure 9 have been interpolated by a rational function P (x )/Q (x ), where P (x ) and Q (x ) are polynomials of degree a h at most n (see ﬁgure 10). The singularity is removed by varying the imaginary part until a cusp formation corresponding to the point where dω/dx = 0 is veriﬁed. Figure 11 displays the localization of the saddle point of the dispersion relation in the complex x -plane, calculated from the experimental mean flow of the unforcedcase (ﬁgure 7). The diﬀerent theoretically predicted frequencies (i.e global frequencies obtained at . w 1 w 2 m 2 x = x , x = x or x = x ) as well as the real measured global frequency of the wake are s / summarized in table 1. The three linear criteria give values of the global frequencies close to those measured experimentally. However, the theoretical frequency ω given by the saddle-point criterion seems to display better agreement: the predicted frequency. is f (xs ) = 0.97 Hz while the measured frequency is 0.98 Hz. Figure 11. Localization of the saddle point of the dispersion relation in the complex x -plane r b m  in the unforced case. This result conﬁrms that the use of an inviscid equation applied to time-averaged mean velocity proﬁles is suﬃcient to determine the local properties of the flow as was u s 9, already observed by Triantafyllou et al. (1986) and Hammond & Redekopp (1997); it 4 : 7 also conﬁrms that the linear criterion proposed by Chomaz et al. (1991) is suﬃcient to predict the real global frequency from these local characteristics. Mean flow modiﬁcation and stability properties for forced regimes We have seen that the stability analysis applied on to unforced case was able to bring out the local and global properties of the wake. Thus, the same procedure will bev applied to the same wake under forcing conditions in order to study the modiﬁcation i n U g of these properties as a function of the forcing parameters. We explored the forced n o regimes in the range of forcing parameters 0 < A < 5 and 0 < f /f < 5. The forcing T f 0 o a i J frequency ff /f0 = 5 was found by Thiria et al. (2006) to be a regime with minimal i a h drag and where the modiﬁcations of the wakes characteristics were signiﬁcant but g n a varying suﬃciently slowly as a function of the forcing amplitude. Thus, this case will h S . e be fully detailed ﬁrst in the following section. Forcing at ff /f0 = 5 Figure 12 (see page 144) displays the time-averaged mean flows (velocity modulusas a function of space) for the forcing frequency f /f = 5 as a function of the forcing amplitude from A = 0 (unforced case) to A = 5. As can be observed, the mean w characteristics of the flow are strongly aﬀected by the forcing conditions. The reverse flow region, initially of length close to two cylinder diameters, starts to grow as we increase the forcing amplitude. When A reaches higher values, the reverse flow region. becomes more diﬃcult to detect since negative velocities seem to be absent in the   Stability properties of forced wakes Uncontrolled case Figure 13. Evolution of the spatial distribution of absolute growth rate ω0i as a function of e j b  the forcing amplitude at the forcing frequency ff /f0 = 5. The ﬁrst curve corresponds to the, uncontrolled case displayed in ﬁgure near wake of the cylinder. (Experimental results show that for suﬃciently strong forcing amplitude, eﬀectively no negative values of the velocity can be detected. However, recent numerical results (Thiria, Bouchet & Wesfreid 2007b) appear to have found such values. However, this separated region (i.e. region of very weak velocity,  compared to the non-wake region) continues to grow. The typical width becomes weaker as the forcing amplitude increases. These measurements conﬁrm the eﬀect of the forcing on the mean flow perturbations, generated through the action of the Reynolds stress. We extended the stability analysis procedure used for the free case to the averaged mean flows represented in ﬁgure 12. In the same way, the real and imaginary parts of the complex local absolute frequency were obtained and both quantities are plotted as a function of the longitudinal coordinate x in ﬁgures 13 and 14. The stability properties of the forced wakes as a function of the amplitude A of the forcing are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. The absolutely unstable region, initially of length two cylinder diameters extends over four diameters for a forcing amplitude A = 5. The evolution of this AU region is displayed in ﬁgure 15. For A = 0 to 5, the AU region grows gradually spatially and the magnitude of the absolute growth rate globally decreases with the forcing amplitude demonstrating more stable system. These observations are in agreement with Thiria et al. (2006) who observed a strong decrease in the global fluctuation rate for the same forcing conﬁguration. For forcing amplitude A = 5, the length of the AU region begins to 150 B.  Figure 14. Evolution of the spatial distribution of the absolute frequency ω as a function of the forcing amplitude, the forcing frequency is f /f = 5. The ﬁrst curve corresponds to the uncontrolled case displayed in ﬁgure Figure 15. Evolution of the absolute unstable region as a function of the forcing amplitude at the forcing frequency ff /f0 = 5. The error bars have been determinate graphically from. Figure 16. Global frequency selected by the wake as a function of the forcing amplitude. , experimental hot-ﬁlm measurements;, theoretical prediction from linear b u s saddle-point criterion ωs reduce. This decrease, which seems to be sign of transition in the instability nature of the wake, will be discussed later as it becomes clearer for the other forcing frequencies. Nevertheless,  for the forcing frequency  f /f = 5, the diﬀerent cases studied (0 < A < 5), all exhibit a ﬁnite AU region, characteristic of flows giving rise to , self-sustained oscillations. Since the linear stability analysis showed that the forced wakes could give rise to a global mode, one can look for the selected global frequency. In the same way as for the free case, the theoretical global frequency of the forced flows was determinate by looking for the saddle point xs in the complex x -plane. The results of the computation are displayed in table 2 and plotted in ﬁgure 16, to be compared with experimental measurements of the global frequency performed with hot ﬁlm, as explained in § 3.1. The theoretical prediction from the linear saddle-point criterion appears to be of great accuracy since the diﬀerence between the theoretical and experimental results does not exceed 5 %. The observed tendency is, for both the theoretical and experimental situations, of a slight decrease of the global frequency with the amplitude of the forcing. Thus, the stability characteristics of these forced wakes are strongly dependent on the forcing amplitude. The cylinder oscillation produces a mean flow correction which is at the origin of the change in the dynamics of the wake. By modifying its mean state, the local stability properties are also naturally modiﬁed. As a consequence, the system selects a diﬀerent global mode (thus a diﬀerent global frequency) related to this new mean state. For this forcing frequency, we have seen that the forced wakes always selected a global mode whose characteristics depend on the forcing conditions. Figure 17. Evolution of the absolute growth rate ω0i as a function of the forcing amplitude for a forcing frequency ff /f0 = 4. The ﬁrst case corresponds to the uncontrolled flow displayed u s 9,  in ﬁgure 7. 4 : 7 5 : 2 1 t a 0 5.2. Forcing at f /f  = 4 2 As in the previous section for f /f = 5, we obtained by PIV measurements the c  time-averaged mean flows for f /f = 4 and for A varying from 0 to 5 and used this , ﬁeld as a base for the stability analysis. We discuss here only the results concerning the distribution of the local stability properties of the flow. Figures 17 and 18 display the results of the computation for both the real and imaginary part of the complex absolute frequency ω0  as a function of the longitudinal coordinate x and the forcing amplitude .This case exhibits a similar qualitative behaviour to that previously seen for ff /f0 = 5. For an amplitude A = 1 the typical length of the AU region reaches a value of more than 3.5d instead of 2.5d for the forcing frequency f /f  = 5 (see ﬁgure 15). The predicted saddle-point  frequency is lower for a given amplitude than in the results for f /f  = 5. The correction of the mean flow seems to be more important as a function of the forcing amplitude as the forcing frequency is lower. However, while the flow is able to develop global modes for the range of the amplitude of the oscillation 0 < A  3 (i.e. there exists an AU/CU transition) the cases for higher values of the forcing amplitude exhibit a completely diﬀerent behaviour. As can be observed for the cases ff /f0 = 4, A > 2 of ﬁgure 17, the quasi-totality of the spatial distribution of the local absolute growth rate ω  is negative. These flows are globally linearly stable and behave just as ampliﬁers of external disturbances. In addition, the hot-wire measurements conﬁrm that certain forcing conditions launch. Figure 18. Evolution of the absolute pulsation ω  as a function of the forcing amplitude for a forcing frequency ff /f0 = 4. The ﬁrst case corresponds to the uncontrolled flow displayed in ﬁgure this transition from global instability to convective instability (CI). Figure 19 shows two spectra of the fluctuating velocity measured from the axis at the location (y = 0.5d ) for the two cases of ﬁgure 17 outside the lock-in region (i.e where the wake fluctuations do not contain the forcing frequency). The ﬁrst spectrum has been measured for the forcing conditions ff /f0 = 4, A = 2. The frequency distribution clearly shows the synchronized nature of the flow. The two peaks corresponding to the fundamental mode of the perturbation (f = 0.98 Hz) and its ﬁrst harmonic are characteristic of self-sustained oscillations. These experiments correspond to the theoretical predictions of ﬁgure 17. The case f /f  = 4, A = 4, taken after absolute/convective transition, exhibits a large band of ampliﬁed frequencies as can be observed for convective instabilities. Note that the ﬁrst peak near 0.8 − 0.9 Hz can be interpreted as the unstable convective frequency f (xs ) obtained from the linear analysis in the globally stable region (see ﬁgure 18). 
Discussion 
Since the behaviour for the forcing frequency ff /f0 = 4 was diﬀerent from that observed for f /f = 5, we generalized the stability analysis for other forcing frequencies ff /f0 = 3, as a function of the forcing amplitude A. The results of the stability analysis in the ( plane are summarized  in ﬁgure 20 denote a globally stable flow, while the stars denote a globally unstable flow (i.e. a flow supporting a global mode). The lozenges () indicate the transition between these two states.  Figure 19. Frequency spectra obtained by hot-ﬁlm measurements outside the lock-in region (i.e. where the wake fluctuations do not contain the forcing frequency): (a ) f/f0 = 4, A = 2, (b) T o a f/f0 = 4, A = 4. The lower the forcing frequency, the sooner the transition from global instability to convective instability occurs, except in the subharmonic forcing case where the transition point starts to grow again with the forcing amplitude.  For the forcing frequency f /f = 1, the flow is globally stable as soon as the cylinder begins its motion. This point has not been veriﬁed, but with regard to the evolution of the transition point as a function of the forcing frequency, we concluded that the transition . GI/GS (global stability to instability) takes place closer to A = 0 than to A = 1. Nevertheless, the error bars in ﬁgure 20 testify to the uncertainly of this transitiondetection. According to these results, the existence of a global mode in open flowsunder forcing conditions in the supercritical regime is not intrinsic and depends directly on the forcing parameters.   Figure 20. Predicted global stability properties of forced wakes in the (A, f /f )-plane: , globally stable flow, globally unstable flow, the transition between these two states, corresponding to a critical value of the forcing amplitude for each forcing frequency. In the globally unstable region, the symbols enclosed by  correspond to the forcing cases on C e which a study of the spatial structure of the global mode have been performed. It is important to note that the boundary between global and convective instability displayed in ﬁgure 20 closely follows the curve delimiting the ‘lock-on’ and ‘no lock-on’ states in earlier works concerning the behaviour of the lift fluctuations of a circular cylinder in oscillation. Baek & Sung (2000), Baek, Lee & Sung (2001) and Cheng, 4 : 7 5 Chew & Luo (2001), in a similar conﬁguration to the one in this paper, established : 2 1 t precisely numerically the two diﬀerent regimes existing for the wake under forcing conditions. These curve shows a continuous behaviour. The ‘lock-on’ state describes lift fluctuations (i.e. the footprint of all the fluctuations in the wake, (see Saﬀman 1992 c O 0 or Protas & Wesfreid 2003), containing only the forcing frequency. Conversely, the ‘lock-on’ state indicates a more complex frequency content that includes the forcing frequency and a frequency linked to the far-wake instability. While the boundary between ‘lock-on’ and ‘no lock-on’ was well deﬁned in previous works, the physical mechanisms responsible for this transition are not clear. According to our results obtained from a stability analysis of the mean forced flow, this behaviour can now be fully interpreted from the transition exhibited in ﬁgure 20. When the forced wake supports a global mode, a second characteristic frequency emerges and the flow can be described as ‘no lock-on’. The ‘lock-on’ state is reached for forcing parameters that trigger the transition to convective instability. Since no precise frequency due to the wake instability can be observed, only the forcing frequency clearly appears in the frequency spectrum. This is an important result, which explains the locking diagram in terms of stability properties. The details of the transition displayed in ﬁgure 20 will be discussed in detail in a forthcoming paper. Nevertheless, the properties of these global modes, when they exist, are now deﬁnedand are determined by the mean flow correction. The spatial structure of these modes and its evolution as a function of the forcing parameters are developed in the next section.  Figure 21. Shape of the global mode for the diﬀerent forcing conditions f /f = 5, A = 1 f /f = 5, A = 2; f /f = 4, A = 1 and f /f = 3, A = 1 at Re = 150. The case with no forcing has been added. These values were obtained by measuring the peak to peak value of the g fluctuating part of the x component of the velocity, at y= d. These forced cases correspond to the points denoted by () in ﬁgure 20. Global mode structure It is known that in bluﬀ body wakes, the spatial envelope of the coherent oscillation described here is strongly inhomogeneous. The form of the global modes and their dependence on the Reynolds number were investigated by Goujon-Durand et al. (1994) and Zielinska & Wesfreid (1995) for triangular bodies and by Wesfreid et al. (1996) for circular bodies. They found that the maximum amplitude the oscillation as well as the correlation length xmax (i.e. the longitudinal position corresponding ) followed scaling laws above the threshold as in other max hydrodynamical instabilities (Wesfreid et al. 1978). The amplitude and the position of the maximum of these modes then scale as (Re − Re ) ,The global-mode form, as well as the scaling laws, are described by a Ginzburg–Landau model (see Chomaz 2005). (This spatial downstream envelope is sometimes described as the perturbation eigenfunction in the flow direction.). The flow behind a circular cylinder is distorted by a strong nonlinear mean flow correction generated by the presence of fluctuations in the wake. The reverse-flow region, which is a footprint of the mean flow and which initially grows linearly with Re . in the subcritical regime, starts to decrease, particularly as (Re − Re ) increases abovem 0 the threshold (see Zielinska et al. 1997). This distortion changes with the intensity of the quadratic Reynolds stress of the fluctuations. Spatial structure of global modes in forced regimes. The shape of the global modes, corresponding to the uncontrolled  case (or free case) and the forced cases f /f = 5, A = 1; f /f = 5, A = 2; f /f = 4, A = 1 and r / ff /f0 = 3, A = 1, is displayed in ﬁgure 21; the corresponding mean flows are shown. Figure 22. Mean flows corresponding to the envelopes displayed in ﬁgure 21. As can be seen, the reverse-flow region grows as the magnitude of the instability decreases, showing that the flow tends to return to its basic state in ﬁgure 22. As we explained in § 2, the mean spatial structures are obtained from PIV measurements computing the ﬁelds from 200 instantaneous velocity ﬁelds for each forcing condition. As done by Wesfreid et al. (1996) for natural vortex shedding, the global mode shapes, or fluctuation envelopes, were obtained from measurements of the peak to peak value of the longitudinal x component of the fluctuating velocity as a function of the longitudinal coordinate, taken at y = ymax (i.e. the position of the maximum of fluctuation v ). The value of y was found to be nearly constant as a function of max the forcing parameters and equal to The global mode shape characteristics are strongly dependent on the forcing parameters. The closer to the transition GS/GI the forced flow is (i.e. to the neutral (or critical) curve of ﬁgure 20), the greater the decrease of the amplitude of the global mode and the further the front of this shape is pushed downstream. Thisimportant observation gives an indication that an eﬀective control parameter (and correlated growth rate) of instability decreases approaching this line. According to our previous work, each global mode shape was renormalized by its maximum amplitude ρmax  and its corresponding longitudinal position in the wake xmax . This is plotted in ﬁgure 23 and we can observe that the normalized shapes can be considered self-similar, suggesting that scaling laws also exist for forced global modes in the same way as for natural wakes. Indeed, we can consider that the growth rate of the global instability changes with the forcing via the modiﬁcation of the mean flow.(In  Figure 23. Shape of the global modes displayed in ﬁgure 21 renormalized by ρ  and recent numerical work Thiria et al. (2007b) showed that, in the same framework e t e r (a cylinder performing rotary oscillations at Re = 150), , as in natural m wakes.) On the other hand, it is clear from ﬁgure 23, that this analysis only applies to the b m a wake envelope representing the global mode. This analysis excludes the amplitude of the near wake, which is the footprint of the flapping due to the oscillating cylinder. Indeed, the fluctuations follow the boundary conditions V (x = 0) = V and (= 0, where V is proportional to the forcing amplitude. We concentrated our study on the cases below the critical curve delimitating the lock – on/no – lock – on 4 : 7 transition showed in ﬁgure 20 (i.e. where a global mode exists). Note that not all the cases previously analysed were used to study the scaling of the spatial modes. This is due to the high spatial resolution of the experimental ﬁelds required for the stability analysis, which, for strong forcing, makes the localization of the global mode shape maximum outside the measurement window impossible. Finally, it appears that the selection of a global mode for flow under forcing conditions is of the same nature as those selected in the natural case. The diﬀerence that the bifurcation is not triggered by the same control parameter. For greater clarity, this principle is illustrated in ﬁgure 24. The length of the reverse-flow region, which n o is the footprint of the mean state, is plotted as a function of the Reynolds number. I the classic case of the flow behind an obstacle, which can be followed from left to right a h in ﬁgure 24, L grows linearly with Re in the stable region, located on the left of Re . When Re > Rec , the flow becomes unstable, Lr  decreases as a consequence of the mean flow modiﬁcation (Zielinska et al. 1997), and a global mode is selected. Its frequency is then determined linearly by its mean state and its spatial properties are dictated bythe scaling laws given in relations (6.1) and (6.2). Under forcing conditions, the mean flow is corrected, the new state then selects a new mode and the bifurcation can be seen this time from up to down. The diﬀerent forced states with global instability (or no – lock – on state) are distributed on a vertical line (for Re > Re ). Discussion and conclusion 
We have seen that a complete linear stability analysis in the parallel approximation applied to mean averaged measured flows can account for the stability properties of   Stability properties of forced wakes .Figure 24. Illustration of the possible bifurcations which can occur for a cylinder unde forcing conditions. The vertical line, for Re > Rec is explored when the forcing A goes from (lower branch) to the critical value A given by the transition line displayed in ﬁgure 20 wakes under forcing conditions. Until now, the fact that the mean state contains all the flow properties had not been fully established. Our results point clariﬁed this and suggest strongly that the mean flow is the flow that should be considered to give good description of such complex systems. By adopting the point of view that this modiﬁed mean flow plays the role of a new basic state, a linear stability analysis then becomes a powerful tool since it is now possible to understand the dynamic of forced wakes. Amplitude equations such as the Ginzburg–Landau or Stuart–Landau models which give a good description of the wake dynamics near the threshold could beextended to forced wakes by taking into account the mean flow correction induced by the forcing. Corrections to those models had been already studied in other physical situations such as for the Rayleigh–Benard instability by Siggia & Zippelius (1981) and Zippelius & Siggia (1983). They introduced an additional term in the Ginzburg Landau equation due to the existence of a stationary mode generated by a nearly uniform lateral velocity induced by the curvature of the rolls destabilizing the pattern further via the three-dimensional vorticity. This correction was recently introduced in studies of wakes by Noack et al. (2003) in order to modify the POD models by coupling the typical Landau model to a second equation for the zeroth mode.  Thus, in order to incorporate the modiﬁcation of the growth rate due to the forcing,a system of coupled equations can be written in the following form: where a is here the complex amplitude of the perturbation and γ , ω , c , c  and are real coeﬃcients; ωI  would then be the linear frequency selected at the critical  160 B.  state and which would be a priori dependent on the critical forcing parameters (i.e. parameters corresponding to the critical line GI/GS displayed in ﬁgure 20). The equation for b is that of the mean flow correction generated by the forcing here depending on the variation of the square of the perturbation amplitude between the controlled and uncontrolled case and the forcing parameters, with F = 0 when t / e r A = f = 0. This equation is coupled to those used for the free wake (see for example Provansal et al. 1987), and so a new term (β + iβ )ab appears, which is proportional to |a |a in the fully developed case and which modiﬁes the linear growth rate. Such a b system could, a priori, account for the wake dynamics of a cylinder performing rotary m a c oscillation, which is consistent with our experimental results, and more generally for forced open flows. The consequences of these conjectures will be developed in future w / / : studies. We would like to thank D. Pradal, S. Goujon-Durand and M. de St-Aubert for their assistance concerning the experimental set-up. We acknowledge D. Barkley and Tuckermann for fruitful discussions, and B. Protas and B. Pier for providing the numerical data needed for this paper. This work was supported by Schlumberger in Clamart, France.
2p 7 t 1 t 0  
