OPTICAL DEVICE FOR MEASURING THE INJECTORS OPENING INCOMMON RAIL SYSTEMS
Riccardo Amirante, Carlo Coratella, Elia Distaso, Gianluca Rossini and Paolo Tamburrano*
Department of Mechanics, Mathematics and Management, Polytechnic University of Bari, Bari 70125, Italy

ABSTRACT−Since the needle displacement exerts a fundamental influence on the operation of Common Rail injection
systems, accurate measurements of the control piston position can be crucial for a more thorough analysis of the behaviour
of injectors, in particular when multiple injections are employed. Eddy current sensors have traditionally been used in lab
activities to measure the control piston position inside injectors; apart from the high cost, the scientific literature clearly shows
their inadequacy, which is mainly due to the presence of electromagnetic disturbance: the current pulse, which controls the
opening of the injector, generates electromagnetic fields which strongly affect the acquisition of data. Many attempts have
recently been made either to solve the interference occurring during such measurements or to propose alternative displacement
transducers whose operation is not influenced by electromagnetic interference. In this paper, a new device for measuring the
injector opening is proposed: it is an optical transducer characterized both by simple and very cheap construction and by a
reliable physical principle for measuring the control piston lift. The reliability of the proposed sensor is assessed by a thorough
experimental campaign and by comparing the experimental results with the numerical predictions achieved by a Common Rail
injector model. Since the assembly of the optical sensor does not affect the injector operation, it can efficiently be used both
for experimental tests and for on-board diagnosis and monitoring of the injector operation.
KEY WORDS : Common rail, Injector, Diesel engine, Optical sensor, Displacement measurement

1. INTRODUCTION
The advent of the electronic Diesel engine control plays an important role in the development of diesel engines, in
terms of performance improvement and optimization of consumptions. As is well known, the Common Rail (CR)
MultiJet system has replaced the previous UniJet system, allowing Diesel engines to satisfy all the environmental
targets (euro 3 and euro 4 standards) concerning the reduction in exhaust emissions and combustion noise
(Tanaka et al., 2002; Celikten, 2003; Vanegas and Peters, 2009). However, in order to satisfy the stricter limits
imposed by new European emission standards (Euro 5 and, after 2014, Euro 6), reliable predictions of the engine
behaviour, including all the parameters affecting it, are required. Current research studies have been focused on the
injection process. The effects of different parameters upon the quantity of fuel injected by a common rail injector was
thoroughly analyzed by Bai et al. (2016).
An effective one-dimensional spray model was developed by Xu et al. (2016), in order to understand the effect of gas
flow on the penetration of diesel sprays. The impact of different injection types and after-treatment systems on
particulate emissions of light-duty vehicles was deeply investigated by Oh and Cha (2015). Nanoparticles and
other harmful exhaust emissions in accordance with injection strategies and air-fuel ratio changes for small
diesel engines were analyzed by Eom et al. (2017). All the abovementioned papers along with other relevant
research papers (e.g., the studies developed by Lim and Lee (2016) and Wang et al. (2015)) have provided
advancements in modelling, predicting and understanding some important aspects regarding the injection process.
In this scenario, this paper is focused on a very important aspect of the injection process, which is the measurement
of the needle lift inside an injector. Infact, since the displacement of the needle exerts a strong influence on the
injection performance, accurate measurements of the needle position can be instrumental in achieving a more
thorough analysis of the behaviour of injectors. Precise knowledge of the needle lift during injections
can also help researchers better investigate misfire in Diesel engines (which is due, as is well known, to injection
problems) in order to improve current methods for detecting the phenomenon (Chang et al., 2002; Hu et al., 2011; Liu et
al., 2013; Fan et al., 2014).
Significant improvements must still be done as far as the measurement of the needle lift is concerned, in spite of the
several advancements achieved in measuring systems for internal combustion engines, such as highly-effective
measurement techniques for the characterization of particle emissions (see, e.g., the studies developed by Amirante et

al. (2015a), Myung et al. (2014) and Choi et al. (2014)) or
novel solutions for the in-cylinder pressure measurement
(see, e.g., the cost-effective solution proposed by Amirante
et al. (2015b), and novel NOx prediction methods based on
the in-cylinder pressure measurement developed by Chung
et al. (2016).
To the authors’ knowledge, all the commercially available
displacement transducers cannot be used in serial application
for on-board measurements of the needle lift because of the
complexity of their assembly which in turn affects the
normal operation of injection systems. In laboratory
applications, eddy current sensors have traditionally been
used to measure the displacement of the control piston,
which is equal to that of the needle because they are always
in contact inside the injector; however, in spite of their
widespread use, the scientific literature clearly shows their
inadequacy for such applications, because of the presence
of electromagnetic disturbances (generated by current
pulses controlling the opening and closing phases of
injectors) which strongly affect signal acquisition. As far as
this issue is concerned, very complex and expensive
solutions have been proposed to date in an attempt to avoid
the electromagnetic interference that usually occurs during
measurements (Sienkiewicz and Shukla, 1997; Prelle et al.,
2006; Virdee, 2004). Among these solutions, the possibility
of mounting the eddy current sensor directly in the nozzle
to obtain a much higher signal quality could be very
promising; however, apart from its high cost, the extension
of this technique to on-board measurements seems
unfeasible because of its complexity.
In contrast, this paper proposes the design of a new and
cheap sensor for reliable measurements of the control
piston lift, namely an optical transducer that guarantees
lower manufacturing costs and times in comparison with
all the solutions proposed recently. The choice of using an
optical measurement system is justified by its capability of
ensuring high standards of signal cleanliness even during
measurements affected by high interference.
Apart from its simplicity and cost-effectiveness, the
optical sensor has the potential to outperform the previous
solutions because its implementation in a commercial
injector does not affect the injector operation; therefore, for
the first time, the proposed sensor can efficiently be used
also for on-board diagnosis and monitoring of the injection
process.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1. Operating Principles and Assembly of the Optical
Sensor
Figure 1 shows two cross sectional views of a typical CR
injector. The position of the needle (1) and the control
piston (2), which are kept in contact by the nozzle spring
(3) and an intermediate element (4), is determined by both
the fuel pressure in the delivery chamber (5) and the fuel
pressure in the control chamber (6). When the solenoid (7)

is energized, the check ball (8) lifts from its seat and the
fuel pressure in the control chamber drops because the fuel
is discharged through hole A (9). The pressure in the
control chamber cannot rise quickly because of hole Z (10),
therefore the higher pressure acting on the needle forces the
needle to lift from its seat, thus commencing the injection.
The measurement of the needle displacement is not a
trivial task because the needle is placed in the engine head,
which operates at very high temperatures. Another issue is
the mechanical resistance of the needle, which is surrounded
by fuel at high pressure and an eventual drilling operation
aimed at placing a sensor on the needle could affect its
mechanical resistance.
To overcome these issues, technical solutions provided
to date are based on the use of displacement transducers
positioned in the injector body in order to measure the
position of the control piston, rather than the needle position.
Specifically, eddy current sensors are traditionally used to
accomplish this task. However, the development of this
solution needs to face up several technical difficulties,
which are still unresolved. First of all, the installation of an
eddy current sensor requires material removal from the control piston by means of machining operations in order
to realize the conical surface on which its components are
usually placed (see Figure 2). Despite removing material
from the control piston is less critical than removing the
same amount of material from the needle, such a conical
part can introduce a point of mechanical weakness even in
the control piston and alter its total deformation when
subjected to the compression forces.
This technique is very expensive and its application is
only used in laboratory tests. Moreover, measurements
provided by an eddy current sensor are disturbed by the
electromagnetic interference generated by the current that
circulates in the solenoid of the injector, resulting in
degradation and partial loss of data that make the signal
less accurate.
To overcome the interferences and high costs arising
from the employment of eddy current sensors, the device
presented here is an optical sensor. It is mainly composed
of a cheap light emitting diode and a compatible photo
receiver, which are positioned opposite each other. As
shown in Figure 3, the two photo elements are placed
outside the injector body and in correspondence of the
control piston.
A beam of infrared light (λ ≈ 900 nm) is generated by the
photo diode and then reaches the photo receiver by virtue
of both the two holes (d = 4 mm) machined in the injector
body and the hole (d = 1.5 mm) machined in the control
piston.
The hole in the control piston, because of its great
hardness, was achieved by means of a drilling operation
with cemented carbide (Widia) tools.
The motion of the control piston during the injector
opening and closing causes the variation in the overlap
between the holes of the injector body, which are motionless,
and the hole of the control piston, which can move
perpendicularly to the light beam (see Figure 4). As a
result, the receiver is reached by a light beam whose
intensity is proportional to the area of the intersection
between the fixed circles and the moving one, and such
intensity variations are indicative of the displacement of
the control piston.
Figure 5 shows the geometrical characteristics of the
emitter and the receiver used in this work. Both the emitter
and the receiver require a power supply of 5 V. The emitter
consists of a photodiode, made of gallium arsenide which
works in the infrared, emitting a light beam whose
wavelength is around 900 nm. In the circuit emitter, a
limiting resistor of the value of 40 ohms ± 5 % is placed in
series with the photodiode in order to limit the current
flowing through it, since the maximum allowable value is
100 mA (with +5 V supply voltage). The receiver is a NPN
silicon Photodarlington and is loaded with a resistance of
100 Ω placed between the emitter and the ground potential.
During a light pulse, the receiver is turned on and provides
an output voltage signal indicative of the piston
displacement. The time delay (rise and fall time) of the
receiver is 75 ns, which is much shorter than the duration
of the signal. Cheap receivers with higher dynamic
response are also available and could be employed to
further increase the system response.
As shown in Figure 6, two plates of polycarbonate
(capable of transmitting infrared light, stemming the
phenomena of the beam dispersion), whose pins are forced

into the aforementioned holes, were utilized to support the
diodes (Figure 6).
The dimensions of the plates did not constitute an issue
for the experimental test rig; therefore, for simplicity
reasons, large plates (compared to the dimensions of the
diodes) were used in the prototype to support the diodes.
However, it should be noted that the supports of the diodes
must be manufactured as small as possible in the case of
on-board measurements; considering that the diodes have
very short dimensions (see Figure 5), also their supports
can be designed very small. Even the layout of the supports
could be changed in order to better adapt the device to the
engine on which it is mounted.
Figure 7 reports the voltage-overlap relationship (blue
line), which was retrieved experimentally in a preliminary
test carried out to setup the device. The graph shows the
convenience of working in the middle part (approx. from
40 % to 70 %), in order to have both a linear trend (see
orange line) and the maximum voltage gradient (approx. 1
Volt) which increases the sensitivity of the sensor (the
voltage gradient could further be increased by acting on the
shape of the hole and employing an effective optimization
process based on genetic algorithms (Amirante et al., 2014;
Amirante and Tamburrano, 2014).
The proposed sensor does not affect the normal behaviour
of the injector on which it is mounted, because the emitter
and the receiver can be placed externally to the injector
body, and because the hole drilled in the control piston does
not alter its total deformation under compression. Figure 8
shows a drawing with dimensions of the control piston
used in the experimental campaign; in the case of the most
critical compression load of 2000 bar (the maximum
achievable injection pressure in typical CR systems)
applied both to the reference control piston (without the
hole) and to the same control piston with the hole, one can
easily verify that the percentage difference between their
deformations is less than 0.01 ‰ and hence absolutely
negligible. As a result, the drilled control piston does not
undergo any significant variations in its behaviour with
respect to the normal configuration (without the hole).
Similarly, the fatigue resistance is not significantly
changed. In fact, one can verify that, in the case of the most
critical fatigue loading cycle (alternate loads ranging from
the minimum pressure of 1 bar to the maximum achievable
pressure of 2000 bar), the coordinate given by the
intersection between the mean and the amplitude of the
stress cycling calculated in the critical section (in
correspondence of the hole) lies under the limit curve of the
Haigh diagram.
In conclusion, since the total deformation under
compression and the fatigue resistance of the control piston
are not changed significantly, the optical sensor can
successfully be used for on board application in addition to
typical lab tests.
2.2. Minor Modifications to the Injector Body
During the common operation of a CR injector, a little
amount of fuel, flowing through the internal channels of
the injector, goes back from the high pressure zone
surrounding the needle to the fuel tank (see Figure 9
leakage zone). Since the leakage reaches the optical device
Figure 7. Signal vs Overlap relationship.
Figure 8. Drawing with dimensions (mm) of the control
piston.
Figure 9. Leakage flow through the internal channels of the
injector.
zone and the presence of fuel in the measuring chamber
can prevent the transit of the light signal, the injector
system needs a few modifications to isolate the volume
inside which the light passes, keeping the fuel away from
the measuring ambient.
In the prototype, this problem was easily solved by using
two elastomer rings, forced on the control piston and used
as mechanical seals, and by drilling two additional holes
above and below the measuring zone to allow drainage of
the oil, which was discharged from this zone to the fuel
tank by means of external tubes (see Figures 10 and 11). To
guarantee a greater tightness of the measuring ambient, the
zone comprised between the two elastomer rings was fed
with compressed air entering through another hole drilled
in the body of the injector (see Figure 11 n.1). In such a
way, the generated air cushion protected the measuring
zone from the reflux of the oil.
It is important to highlight that the pressure of the
supplied air can be kept slightly greater than 1 bar, and it
can be supplied by the turbocharger mounted in the vehicle
even without energy loss because there is no air consumption
in the measuring zone.
It should be noted that the absence of fuel in the
metering chamber does not increase friction between the
external surface of the control piston and the internal
surface of the injector body because, as shown in Figures 1,
9 and 11, these surfaces are not in contact in this zone and
here lubricating action is not required. In addition, all the
modifications shown in Figure 1 do not alter the regular
reflux of fuel towards the zones in which the surfaces are in
contact and require to be lubricated, so the overall
lubricating action is certainly not influenced.
2.3. Test Bench
The validity of the proposed solution was assessed by
several tests carried out on the Common Rail test bench of
the Polytechnic University of Bari.
The test bench, shown in Figure 12, is engine-free and is
composed of some commercial automotive components
Figure 10. Two gaskets placed above and below the hole of
the control piston (on the left); Holes drilled in the external
body for oil drainage (on the right).
Figure 11. Devices to avoid reflux of fuel in the measuring
zone: (1) Pipe delivering pressurized air; (2) Hole to
insufflate air; (3) Holes for housing the optical sensor; (4)
Hole on the control piston; (5) Two gaskets; (6) Sealed
chamber for the optical measurement; (7) Holes to drain
fuel from the high pressure zones; (8) Injector body
(device patented in October 2012, with PCT extension
numbered PCT/IB2013/000815)
along with additional instrumentation which were properly
assembled in order to reproduce the main working
conditions of a typical Common Rail Injection system
(Catalano et al., 2002; Amirante et al., 2006; Carlucci et
al., 2008; Papagiannakis et al., 2007). Figure 12 also shows
a scheme of the test rig. There are two fuel circuits,
working at high (dark line) and low pressure (outlined
line), respectively. The mineral oil ISO 4113, which has the
same properties of Diesel fuel, was used during the
experimental tests. The high pressure pump (2) is equipped
with an electrical discharge valve (3) to regulate the rail
pressure. The fuel is injected into a cylindrical capacity,
charged with air at 20 bar, which replaces an engine
cylinder and also avoids cavitation inside the nozzle (6).
The injector is opened by a power supply equipment (12),
which provides the current to the coil. A low pressure
pump is installed inside the fuel tank (5) and supplies fuel
to the high pressure pump (2), driven by an electrical
engine. High pressure pipes connect the pump to the rail
(9) and the rail with the injector (14). A high frequency
transducer measures the pressure inside the nozzle (8). The
opening of the injector is driven by the current waveform,
which is constituted by a high current pulse (peak current)
to overcome the inertia of the injector, and a lower current
(hold current) to hold the injector opened.
Figure 13 shows the injector that was used to test the
optical sensor (identifiable by the code 0 445 110 183).
A piezo-resistive high pressure sensor was also adopted
to measure the time history of the injection pressure, which
represents a valid indication of the dynamic behaviour of
the injector. In fact, since the first experimental
investigations carried out by Fiat Research Centre and
successively by Bosch (Stumpp and Ricco, 1996),
measurements of the nozzle pressure have been used to
study the injector opening. The reliability of this approach
has been confirmed by other investigations that have
demonstrated the clear correlation among injector opening,
fuel spray across the nozzle and nozzle pressure
(Heimgärtner and Leipertz, 2000; Catania et al., 2008).
In the first experiences, the nozzle pressure was measured
indirectly by means of strain-gages fixed on the nozzle
(Stumpp and Ricco, 1996), while nowadays it is measured
directly by a pressure transducer placed on the nozzle
(Amirante et al., 2006).
The sensor employed in this work is the Kistler 4067
A2000 A2, with 2000 bar full scale and a precision of 0.5
% in the temperature range 20 ~ 200 °C. To allow the
placement of the pressure transducer, a hole of 1.5 mm was
drilled in the sprayer; the assembly is shown in Figure 14.
Such a modification does not affect the injector behaviour
as demonstrated in Amirante et al. (2006).
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Experimental Results
The experimental tests on the Common Rail bench were
performed to assess the effectiveness of the proposed
sensor in measuring the control piston displacement during
UniJet and MultiJet injections. To that end, the parameters
of the injection process were properly set so as to
reproduce each possible scenario on the test bench. Figure
15 shows a first example reporting the time histories both
of the voltage signal from the optical sensor (red line) and
of the current supplied to the coil (blue line), both obtained
during a main injection. It is noteworthy that the trend of
the voltage signal traces the expected needle lift; in fact, the
voltage curve suddenly decreases when the peak of current
occurs (approx. at 3300 µs) and, as expected, the injector
starts opening (approx. at 3500 µs). Afterwards, as a
consequence of the increasing lift of the needle, the voltage
curve decreases until the maximum lift is reached (approx.
at 4800 µs) and the voltage assumes a constant value.
Similarly, the increase in the voltage from 5200 µs to 5800
µs indicates the transient during the injector closure. The
time delay between the start of the peak phase and the
injector opening is equal to about 200 microseconds, which
is a typical value for a CR injector (Stumpp and Ricco,
1996).
The reliability of the optical sensor was further assessed
by several experimental tests during which the coil of the
injector was provided with different current profiles that
are typical both of pilot injections and of main ones. The
pressure acting on the needle was measured by means of
the pressure transducer shown in Figure 14 and its time
history was recorded and used to validate the proposed
optical sensor.
Figures 16 ~ 18 report the time histories of the lift
voltage signal, of the nozzle pressure and of the current in
the coil obtained during three injections with the rail
pressure being set to 400 bar, 900 bar and 1050 bar,
respectively. Figure 16 refers to a main injection with a
peak current of 19 A, while Figures 17 and 18 refer to two
pilot injections with a peak current of 16 A and 17 A,
respectively.
The comparison among the curves of the current,
pressure and lift reported in Figures 16 ~ 18 confirms the
effectiveness of the proposed optical sensor. In fact, it is
possible to observe the correspondence between the large
decrease in the voltage, which indicates the needle lift, and
the large pressure drop in the nozzle, caused by the sudden
opening of the injector. Furthermore, as expected, the
voltage drop that indicates the opening phase increases
with the rail pressure (see Figures 17 and 18). In fact, the
greater the rail pressure, the higher the needle lift and, as
shown by the voltage curves, the longer the closing phase.
It is also possible to observe the typical pressure
oscillations occurring in the nozzle after the closing of the
injector.
Similarly, Figures 19 ~ 21 refer to three Main injections
that differ from one another because different values of
energizing time (peak + hold), peak & hold currents and
rail pressure, whose values strongly affect the opening of
the injector, were employed.
The different duration of the opening phase (from 3600
µs to 6700 µs in Figure 20 and from 3500 µs to 7200 µs in
Figure 21) is due to its strong dependence on the overall
energizing time, which was changed from 1100 µs (Figure
20) to 1500 µs (Figure 21).
Figures 22 and 23 report other measurements obtained
with two main injections, performed with quite similar
current profiles and energising time but with a large
difference in the rail pressure (400 bar and 900 bar,
respectively). As shown by the comparison of the two
graphs, the higher rail pressure makes the voltage fall (i.e.
starting lift) faster, because of the bigger force acting on the
needle. In both cases, the voltage signal is again consistent
with the expected behaviour of the needle, evidencing the
reliability and accuracy of the proposed optical sensor once
more. As additional information, it is also possible to
observe the typical pressure oscillation in the nozzle
(Catalano et al., 2002; Amirante et al., 2006) which is due
to the propagation of the compression waves that are
created by the opening and closing of the injector, e.g. see
Figure 16 (the pressure increases from 4500 µs to 5000 µs
and decreases from 5000 µs to 6000 µs and so on).
As visible in Figures 16 to 23, the signal of the control
piston displacement does not maintain a constant value but
presents small fluctuations around a mean value; this can
be attributed to the corresponding pressure oscillations
shown in the same figures. These pressure oscillations can
also be fed by downstream cavitation processes from
which reverse pressure waves may be propagated. The
pressure trends shown in Figures 16 to 23 are consistent
with the expected behaviour of the pressure inside the
nozzle; in fact, the pressure trends are very similar to those
registered in a previous experimental campaign (Amirante
et al., 2006), in which the goal was to demonstrate the reliability of the nozzle pressure measurement in a
commercial injector (without implementing the proposed
optical system). More explanations for the pressure trends
and associated phenomena are provided by Amirante et al.
(2006).
Similar oscillations both in the lift of the control piston
and in the injected mass flow rate were also encountered by
other authors during tests of commercial injectors (Seykens
et al., 2004; Suh and Lee, 2008); their explanation for such
oscillations is the occurrence of cavitation associated with
a rapid opening and closing of the injector which induce
pressure waves (Seykens et al., 2004, 2005).
In order to evaluate whether the optical sensor is capable
of providing reliable measurements even for different
injector geometries, the control piston was replaced with
another one, having a smaller diameter of the upper part
(the difference from the original one is two hundredths of
millimetres). Figures 24 and 25 report the signals recorded
during two injections, which were characterized by a
similar current profile but with different rail pressures (650
and 850 bar, respectively), both performed with the
modified control piston. The comparison shows that, as
mentioned earlier, the higher rail pressure causes both the
faster lift of the needle and the longer duration of the
closing phase: it is noteworthy that both are accurately
predicted by the optical sensor. Furthermore, the smaller
diameter of the upper part of the new control piston causes
leakage losses in the control chamber and hence the
slowdown in the filling process through the “Z” orifice (see
Figure 1); as a result, a slowdown in the needle closure is
also expected. Even this behaviour is well reproduced by
the optical sensor, in fact it is seen that the slope of the
voltage signal during the closing phase of Figures 24 and
25 is lower than that of the previous figures.
Finally, additional tests were successfully performed by
simulating multiple injections, in order to demonstrate the
reliability of the proposed sensor in each possible scenario
of the injection process. Even in this case, the optical
sensor provided the same excellent results; as an example,
Figure 26 reports the signals recorded during multiple
injections (3 injection strategy) performed with the second
control piston.
With regard to the multiple injections technology, the
importance of the optical sensor must further be remarked
because such reliable measurements can allow the values
of dwell times to be accurately chosen in order to optimize
the performance of Multi-jet injection systems
3.2. Numerical Validation of the Experimental Tests
Although it has widely been demonstrated that the nozzle
pressure is strongly connected to the needle position
(Stumpp and Ricco, 1996), and hence the previous analysis
(based on the comparison between time histories of the
nozzle pressure and lift measurements) can be considered a
reliable tool for the validation of the optical sensor, the
reliability of the sensor was further assessed by the
comparison between the experimental data and the
numerical predictions provided by a numerical model of
the injector.
In the last years, several accurate models for the
simulation of high pressure Diesel injection systems were
proposed in the scientific literature (Marcer et al., 2010;
Seykens et al., 2005; Liu and Wang, 2012) in order to
predict the dynamic behaviour of injectors. Also in this
case, the numerical model of the Common Rail injector
was developed by means of the AMESim Software
(Advanced Modelling Environment for Simulation
(AMESim, 2004) with the aim of accurately reproducing
the hydraulic and mechanical layout, since it is well known
that the layout of the system and its geometrical features
strongly affect the injection process. The choice of
AMESim is justified by its capability of reproducing
physical phenomena with great accuracy, allowing the
realization of a model as similar as possible to the real
system (Marcer et al., 2010; Seykens et al., 2005; Liu and
Wang, 2012).
The injector behaviour is assumed one dimensional, and
a lumped parameter model is considered. The model also
accounts for the cavitation phenomenon, since cavitation
influences the control piston lift (Ficarella et al., 1999;
Giannadakis et al., 2008).
With regard to the cavition model, AMESim uses the
same approach as that described by Seykens et al. (2005),
which takes into account the occurrence of cavitation by
only reducing the discharge coefficient (defined as the ratio
of the actual flow rate to the maximum theoretical flow
rate). In particular, the discharge coefficient within a
metering section is changed according to the cavitation
number, which is a non-dimensional parameter indicating
the expected cavitation intensity. The AMESim cavitation
model has proved to be very accurate, as shown by
different studies present in the literature (Seykens et al.,
2004, 2005).
Both the combustion chamber pressure, downstream of
the nozzle, and the rail pressure are held constant. The
latter was set constant since it is subjected to variations
whose duration is much longer than the injection time
(Amirante et al., 2006).
With regard to the forces acting during the injection
process, the model takes into account the electromagnetic
forces (relevant to the activation and control of the
injector), the internal forces between the needle and the
control piston, the pressure forces exerted by the oil in the
control and delivery chambers and, finally, the external
elastic force generated by the centring spring of the
solenoid valve. The good accuracy of the model, according
to the common scientific approach (Marcer et al., 2010;
Seykens et al., 2005; Liu and Wang, 2012), allows the
above listed actions to be reproduced with good precision.
Figure 27 shows a sketch of the AMESim model of the
Common Rail injector employed in the experimental
campaign to test the optical sensor; the correspondence
between the mechanical and electrical parts and their icons
is also depicted in detail.
The “piecewise linear” submodel was employed to
achieve the same current profiles used in the experimental
campaign for ease of comparison. The electro-hydraulic
valve was modelled by means of a solenoid, a “Mass block
with stiction and coulomb friction and end stops”, a “Ball
valve with conical seat” and a “Piston with spring”.
With regard to the control piston - needle system, the
needle (13) and the control piston (11) are considered as
two different elements separated by a spring-damper (12)
in order to account for the possible relative motion between
them, although they are expected to have the same
displacement.
Moreover, the model takes into account the fuel
compressibility during the injection.
The ducts inside the injector and the pipe connecting the
rail with the injector are modelled as undeformable by
means of the “Simple wave equation hydraulic pipe” sub
model. The rail is modelled by a “constant pressure source”
sub model.
In order to increase the accuracy of the model, the
geometrical data of the injector and the properties of the oil
(type ISO 4113) used in the experimental campaign were
considered in the simulations.
Since the numerical investigation aims at further proving
the reliability of the sensor, the comparison against the
experimental results is mainly focused on the control piston
displacement.
Figures 28 ~ 31 show the comparison between the
numerical predictions and the experimental measurements.
The red line denotes the measurement of the control piston
lift, while the green one denotes the simulated lift of the
control piston; the trend of the current (experimental
measurement) is plotted as a blue line. Figures 28 ~ 30
refer to three Main injections while Figure 31 refers to a
Pilot injection.
All these Figures show good agreement between the
experimental measurement and the simulated lift in terms
of both the rise time and the value of the lift at full opening,
and this confirms the accuracy and reliability of the optical
sensor. The numerical predictions of the lift are very
regular, following an ideal behaviour; instead, the
measured lift shows some small oscillations both during
the transient phase and at full opening. As discussed earlier,
such oscillations of the lift must be attributed to highfrequency fluctuations in the upstream pressure and
cavitation occurrence. These phenomena are not captured
by the AMESim simulations, which therefore predicted a
regular and constant lift at full opening.
The agreement between numerical predictions and
experimental values also suggests that the numerical model
can effectively be used to correctly predict both the lift at
full opening and the rise time

4. CONCLUSION
Accurate measurements of the instantaneous position of the
control piston can be instrumental in predicting the real
behavior of Common Rail injectors, in particular when
multiple injections are employed. In this paper, a cheap and
reliable optical sensor suited to measure control piston
position has been proposed and experimentally tested with
the aim of overcoming the unresolved problems
(interferences and high costs) arising from the employment
of eddy current sensors which deeply affect measurement
accuracy. The proposed optical sensor is mainly composed
of a cheap light emitting diode and a compatible photo
receiver, and it can easily be implemented in a typical
injector assembly by using simple drilling operations that
do not affect the operation of the injector and its
mechanical resistance. The injector system also needs a
few modifications to avoid the presence of fuel in the
measuring zone which could alter the accuracy of the
measurements. These modifications consist of two
additional holes and two elastomer rings, which are
necessary to avoid the presence of fuel in the optical
chamber by generating an air cushion inside the measuring
zone. The small amount of air serving as air cushion is
taken from the turbocharger; there is no reduction in the
flow rate delivered by the compressor, because the air is
“blocked” inside the metering zone. As a result, there is no
compressed air consumption and the operating conditions
of the turbocharger are not changed. These modifications,
which can be easily implemented in the manufacturing
process of a commercial injector, are not as intrusive as
those required by typical measurement systems present in
the literature. For example, the installation of an eddy
current sensor (the most used measurement system in
laboratory tests) is very complex and requires removal of
much material from the control piston, thus increasing the
mechanical weakness of the control piston (subjected to
high compression forces), in addition to being affected by
electromagnetic interference. The optical sensor was
mounted on a commercial injector and several experimental
tests were performed on a test bench to validate the
solution proposed. Different current profiles, typical of
pilot and main injections, were supplied to the coil of the
injector; the time history of the pressure acting on the
needle was recorded and was used to evaluate the validity
of the displacement signal. Similar experimental tests were
carried out with a different control piston to assess the
reliability of the measurements even for different
characteristics of the injector geometry. In all the tests, the
voltage signal from the optical sensor was consistent both
with the expected lift of the needle and with the transients
of the pressure acting on the needle, evidencing the
reliability and accuracy of the solution proposed. The
reliability of the sensor was further demonstrated by
comparing the experimental data with the numerical
predictions provided by the AMESim numerical model of
the injector. The experimental results and numerical
predictions show excellent agreement and also suggest the
possible use of the simulation model as a reliable tool for
predicting the needle lift.
The proposed optical sensor is very innovative because
its characteristics can also make its use profitable for realtime on board controls and because it is cost-effective, in
fact the overall cost of its components amounts to about
twenty Euros, while common eddy current sensors can cost
as much as a few thousand Euros.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT−The authors thank Michele Mizzi
and Vito Mele for their support in the experimental campaign.
The study described in this article is the subject of a patent
application (Patent filing October 2012, under submission for
PCT extension)