ABSTRACT
This paper provides a systematic review of recent publications on simulation and analysis of integrated multi-
vector energy networks (rather than energy hubs) and carries this out through the lens of energy trilemma.
This review is essential for energy research community to move forward in effective manner toward 2050 net
zero carbon targets. This paper presents a holistic view of state-of-the-art of research in this field and identifies
gaps in knowledge which should be addressed by future research urgently. Furthermore, this paper introduces a
taxonomy of energy networks analysis, offering a unified description of findings of relatively large number of
publications devoted to the subject. Moreover, this work analyses and classifies current research trends in the
field of analysis of energy networks integration, and also identifies future trends in this field. This review serves
as a guide to researchers regarding the main findings of energy networks integration evaluated through the lens
of energy trilemma. The reviewed papers have been classified into three groups: (i) Operational analysis; (ii)
Optimal dispatch; and (iii) Optimal planning. The focus of the paper is energy networks, since they play
fundamental role in integrated energy systems and there is a lack of understanding of interactions and in-
terdependencies between multi-vector networks. Also, focus of this paper has been on key findings of published
research rather than details of individual energy models. The paper provides useful insights for energy research
community by presenting several novel ideas for future research and facilitating the path to a decarbonised
economy, due to the fulfilled comprehensive systematic review.
1. Introduction
The international aspiration to reach net zero carbon in energy sys-
tems by 2050 is growing. In the UK, the government has set a target of
‘Net Zero’ Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions by 2050 in order to reduce
contribution to global warming [1]. This necessitates performing energy
evaluation through a system-of-systems approach, in order to under-
stand the intrinsic properties of the main layer/sections of the Integrated
Energy Systems (IESs), from natural resources and distribution to the
final energy user as well as the interactions and interdependencies
within each layer/section [2]. These interdependencies and interactions
occur between different energy vectors including natural gas, electricity,
cooling and heating. Energy networks are key components of the whole
energy system that transport the energy extracted from the natural re-
sources to the final energy users. Therefore, there is a growing consensus
that there is a need for a step change in research and development in
multi-energy networks and their interdependencies in order to facilitate
the path to achieving the carbon reduction targets.
Energy networks (including gas, electricity and district heating/
cooling networks) are still predominantly planned and operated sepa-
rately. However, there are several drivers for integrated planning and
operation of these networks including reduction of the use of primary
energy, increasing integration of Renewable Energy Sources (RESs) and
facilitating a low carbon economy [3]. The synergies between energy
networks [4,5] and the interdependencies and interactions between
these networks have been shown to have the potential to bring several
benefits to the integrated planning, optimal dispatch and operation of
energy networks including increasing energy conversion efficiency,
maximised utilisation of primary energy sources, improving the energy
system flexibility, resilience and security and carbon emission reduction
[3,6,7]. Modelling of IES is crucial for understanding the energy net-
works and the potential benefits of their integrated operation. Several
energy system models have been developed, which have been presented
and reviewed in the literature [3,6,8,9]. Moreover, Information and
Communication Technologies (ICTs) have a substantial role in IESs since
they support the coordinated operation of the system by integrating
different parts of the energy system through information sharing
frameworks [7]. Consequently, there are several complexities associated
with planning, management and operation of Integrated Energy Net-
works (IENs), which needs close collaboration of several fields of
expertise including computing science and several engineering disci-
plines to address the challenges of this multi-disciplinary field of
knowledge.
An overview of the benefits of integrated operation of energy net-
works has been carried out in Ref. [3]. However, this does not include a
significant amount of detail and does not relate the findings to the
internationally accepted concept of the energy trilemma, i.e. flexibility,
security and affordability. This greater detail and link to the trilemma is
required in order to identify gaps and directions for an appropriate
future research for meeting carbon reduction targets. To the best of the
knowledge of the authors, no other comprehensive or systematic re-
views were found, that have linked together and organised the findings
of the most important literature on the analysis of energy networks in
relation to the energy trilemma.
Slightly different definitions of the three elements of the energy tri-
lemma exist. Based on the frequency of the definitions used by the au-
thors of the reviewed papers, the following most common definitions of
the energy trilemma have been used in this paper:
(i) Flexibility of operation:
This element of the trilemma denotes how much IENs can respond to
any change in the coupled network(s), including the increase in demand,
without violation of the operational conditions or technical limits.
(ii) Security of supply:
This element of the trilemma indicates the extent that one network
vector can support (in terms of meeting the demand) the operation of
other different but coupled network vectors in the case of a fault
occurrence in part of those coupled network(s), or a shortage of supply
in those coupled network(s).
(iii) Affordability:
This element of the trilemma denotes the amount of costs associated
with the operation, dispatch or planning of the IENs. These costs include
operational and maintenance costs as well as the cost of purchase and
deployment of new assets.
It should be noted that although environmental sustainability (as an
indication of the environmental performance of IENs) has not been
explicitly considered in this definition of the energy trilemma, any
changes to the planning or operation of IENs will have impact on the
environment. In this paper, the environmental impact of any variation in
the above energy trilemma elements are also investigated and evaluated.
It should be noted that the aforementioned definition of the energy
trilemma is in line with the goal number 7 (‘affordable and clean en-
ergy’) of Sustainable Development Goals. This goal aims to ensure access
to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all.
Several vectors are incorporated in multi-vector IENs including
natural gas, electricity, heating, cooling and hydrogen. Table 1 shows
the possible coupling components between the vectors that were
frequently investigated in the literature, i.e. gas, electricity and heat. As
can be seen from the table, almost all these vectors, i.e. gas, electricity
and heat, can be converted into another vector and vice versa. This also
shows that these networks can impact the operation of the coupled
network(s). For example, the electricity network can impact the opera-
tion of the gas network: (i) either through electricity to gas conversion
units (Power-to-Gas (P2G), electrolyser and electric driven gas com-
pressors); or (ii) through gas to electricity conversion units (Combined
Heat and Power (CHP) and gas turbine). Therefore, these bring both
benefits and challenges to the operation of the IENs in terms of the el-
ements of the energy trilemma as follows:
(i) Flexibility of operation:
Benefits include, optimal scheduling and planning of the networks for
minimum costs and carbon emissions, and optimised utilisation of the
available assets. Challenges include unexpected potentially negative
impact of networks on one another in case of malfunctioning of the
coupling components and hence losing some energy and increasing the
costs and carbon emissions;
(ii) Security of supply:
Benefits include, availability of any form of energy in any network to
meet the unexpected increased demand in the coupled network(s), and
mutual support between network(s) in case of faults in some part of
them or shortage of supply from upstream or from limited natural re-
sources. Challenges include: (a) the optimal placement of the coupling
components to ensure the security of supply; and (b) networks may not
be able to support the coupled network(s) in case of malfunctioning of
the available coupling components;
(iii) Affordability:
Benefits include, reduction of costs either through capturing and
converting renewable energy via different coupling components into
any of the coupled networks, or through optimised utilisation of avail-
able assets. Challenges include increase in costs due to load shedding or
due to malfunctioning of the coupling components.
There are economic and environmental benefits associated with in-
tegrated operation of the networks through these coupling components.
As an example, it was shown that introduction of P2G in the national gas
and electricity transmission networks of Great Britain had reduced the
costs by £35 M and reduced the carbon emissions by 250 kton during a
month [10]. However, it should be noted that these figures cannot be
generalised since they depend on several factors, including the scale of
the networks, the load profile condition (summer or winter), the ca-
pacity and number of available coupling components and storage
devices.
In order to integrate the networks, through utilising the coupling
components listed in Table 1, the following technical interventions are
required: sizing and operating the coupling components optimally.
Operating the coupling components also requires data acquisition sys-
tems, in which the associated data need to be shared with the control
room(s) of different network vectors. This challenging intervention will
be discussed in Section 4. Also, among the technologies that are pre-
sented in Table 1, the ones that are underrepresented in this paper, can
be considered as potential areas for further work.
In this paper, the most important findings drawn from the literature,
on analysis of energy networks, rather than energy hubs, fall in to the
following three categories:
(i) Operational analysis:
This area denotes assessing the operational conditions of the net-
works and ensuring the networks are meeting the demand without
violating the operational limits, i.e. ensuring the voltages in the elec-
tricity network, the pressures in the gas network and pressures and
temperatures in the District Heating Network (DHN) are all within
acceptable and operable ranges. Once, this assessment has been carried
out, a picture of the operation of the network in terms of the power flows
in the electricity network, gas flows in the gas network, and hot water
flows in the DHN is obtained. Then, the final step is to evaluate the
Techno-Economic-Environmental (TEE) performance of the IEN.
(ii) Optimal dispatch:
Optimal dispatch denotes the optimal operational scheduling of
IENs, which is normally performed for the next few hours. This means in
order to meet the demand with the least operational costs (objective
function), how much (amount and scheduling) energy from different
sources needs to be supplied, or how much the amount and scheduling of
different energy conversion units (coupling components) needs to be.
Optimal dispatch also considers the operability of the IEN. Additionally,
the environmental performance is either considered as an element in the
objective function along with the operational costs, or as a constraint.
Hence, optimal dispatch performs an optimal TEE operational sched-
uling of IENs.
(iii) Optimal planning:
Optimal planning denotes investment planning of all the assets of
IENs, including pipes in the gas and district heating networks, cables and
generation units in the electricity network, and coupling components,
for a horizon of time, e.g. next 20 years. In this respect, all the capital
and operational costs (mapped to a base year) will be minimised in order
for the IEN to meet all the current and future demand subject to being
operable and optimally dispatched at all the time snap shots. Similar to
optimal dispatch, the environmental performance is either considered in
the objective function along with all the costs or as a constraint.
Therefore, optimal planning carries out the optimal TEE operational
planning of the IEN for meeting the current and future demand.
In order to provide guidance for engineers and researchers regarding
the operational analysis, optimal dispatch and optimal planning of IENs,
the selected articles in the related field published predominantly in the
last five years are reviewed. The key findings in these articles are ana-
lysed and categorised covering a range of different aspects, which are
linked to the aforementioned energy trilemma elements, i.e. flexibility
of operation, security of supply, affordability. Additionally, a compre-
hensive review of the problem formulation and solving algorithms for
optimal planning and optimal dispatch of IENs has been carried out.
Consequently, the comprehensive systematic review presented in this
paper provides a holistic picture of the state-of-the-art of research in this
extensive field and identifies useful insights, directions, and guidelines
for valuable future applied research in pursuit of the low carbon
transition.
The papers on energy hubs were not considered since hub level
analysis does not consider the operation of the network to ensure the
network is physically operable and is able to meet the load without
violation of operational constraints (see Refs. [11,12] for review of en-
ergy hubs). Also, the focus of this paper is on findings rather than the
energy models since the models developed for simulation and analysis of
IENs have been reviewed in several other literature [3,6,8,9].
The structure of the paper is as follows: section 2 explains the
methodology adopted and describes the way the publications summar-
ised in this paper were identified. Also, key characteristics of published
research were categorised and key findings are described in this section.
Section 3 describes the most important findings of the papers around the
elements of energy trilemma, in three subsections corresponding to the
three key categories of operational analysis, optimal dispatch and
optimal planning. Section 4 presents several directions for valuable
future applied research in optimal planning, optimal dispatch and
operational analysis of IENs. Finally, section 5 concludes the insights of
the paper.
2. Methodology
This section explains the methodology adopted in this paper to find
the published research on analysis of IENs. Also, key characteristics of
published research were categorised and key findings are described. For
this purpose, databases including IEEEXplore, Sciencedirect and Scopus
were searched with the following key words in their title or keywords:
- A combination of two of: ‘gas’, ‘heat’, ‘power’/‘electric’
- ‘multi-energy’, ‘multi-vector’, ‘integrated energy systems’, or ‘inte-
grated energy networks’
- ‘energy system’ or ‘energy network’
Among the resulting papers, the ones based on a model of energy
networks, rather than based on a model of energy hubs, were considered
since energy hubs are already reviewed in Ref. [11,12]. Then, an
assessment was carried out and hence the papers were filtered further
and the ones: (i) with reasonable citations; (ii) from influential re-
searchers in this field; (iii) published in prestigious journals or presented
in credible conferences; and (iv) that were rigorous, most interesting and
complete, were selected to be reviewed in this paper. Given the fact that
English is a universal language, whilst considering only the papers
written in English, a homogenous cover of the research on analysis of
IENs, that is carried out in the world, is captured in this paper. Also,
several papers had performed analysis of a single vector (i.e. gas, elec-
tricity or heat) as well as the point(s) of connection to the network of
other vector(s) and the impact of those networks without considering
the operation of those coupled network(s). Those papers were excluded
since the scope of this paper is multi-vector energy networks. In this
way, the authors are confident that the most important and influential
papers on analysis of energy networks that have been published in the
well-known databases have been captured and scanned in this review.
Once the papers were filtered according to the aforementioned
eligibility criteria, 186 papers were considered to be reviewed in this
paper. Fig. 1 shows that 115 journal papers and 71 conference papers,
with majority of 59 IEEE conference papers, were investigated. Fig. 2
illustrates the share of different journals on publishing the reviewed
papers on analysis of IENs. These two figures show the majority of the
reviewed papers are published in prestigious journals and conferences.
Fig. 3 shows the number of the papers from different countries according
to the affiliation of the first author of these papers, which indicates the
importance of this topic for different countries around the world. As can
be seen, the majority of these papers have been published by the re-
searchers from China (72), UK (31), United States (17) and Iran (12).
The rest of the countries have less than 10 publications.
As shown above, the geographical coverage of the literature review
was diverse and extensive but not exhaustive. However, it should be
noted that the three categories listed above deal with issues that are
applicable to all the energy networks regardless of their vector or
geographical location and whether they are dealing with legacy net-
works or new build infrastructure. It is possible that some issues specific
to developing countries may not have been identified in this review but
these are likely to be driven by commercial or regulatory aspects which
are not the focus of this paper. Therefore, it is reasonable to claim that
the findings from this review have global relevance and value.
These 186 papers were classified into each of the groups below ac-
cording to their models, research questions and scenarios:
- Papers on operational analysis [13–54].
- Papers on optimal dispatch [10,55–157]
- Papers on optimal planning [158–200].
Fig. 4 shows the number of papers found in the above three groups
published in journals and conferences (denoted by ‘conf.’ in the figure)
by year for the last five years. As can be seen from Fig. 4, the total
number of papers published in these three groups has increased in recent
years especially for optimal dispatch and optimal planning groups. In
these three groups, 82.9%, 82.5%, and 80.9% of the reviewed papers,
respectively, are published in the last five years.
3. Classification of IEN analysis methods and key findings
In this section, the methods for IEN analysis adopted in the reviewed
papers for operational analysis, optimal dispatch and optimal planning
of IENs, the algorithms developed and implemented for formulation and
solution of the problem and the key findings of these publications
around the elements of energy trilemma are presented.
The aspects that were more frequently investigated in the papers are
shown in diagrams in Fig. 5 for operational analysis, in Fig. 6 for optimal
dispatch and in Fig. 7 for optimal planning of IENs. These aspects were
identified based on the keywords of the findings of the papers. All these
aspects have impact on analysis of the performance of IENs in terms of
the elements of energy trilemma, i.e. flexibility, security and afford-
ability. The proximity of any of the aspects to any of the above elements
of energy trilemma in Figs. 5–7 does not mean that aspect has more
impact on that element of energy trilemma. Also, the darker the arrow
connecting the aspect to the whole energy trilemma, the more frequent
the appearance and discussion of the aspect in the reviewed papers, as
shown by the legend in these figures.
Among these aspects, the ones that were discussed more frequently
than the others in the papers are described below Figs. 5–7 in separate
paragraphs. It should be noted that ‘Affordability’, is included in almost
all the paragraphs and hence has not been summarised exclusively in
one separate paragraph similar to the other elements of energy
trilemma.
The references that have validated their developed model by
comparing the results of their model with reference data, measurements
or a commercial tool without any scenarios or key findings are not
explained in the sub-sections of this section, since they have not
demonstrated the evolving scenarios to address the energy trilemma.
Also, the results and findings of the papers that are not cited in the ‘Key
findings’ sections (i.e. sections 3.1.2, 3.2.2 and 3.3.2) were not related to
the subjects discussed more frequently in majority of the papers.
Therefore, although some of the papers are scanned and mentioned in
the ‘Methodology’ section, they are not cited in terms of their results and
findings, in order to maintain the organisation of the paper. This is due
to the fact that the purpose of this review is to summarise the most
important findings of the available publications in relation to the
elements of energy trilemma. Additionally, the findings presented in this
section have been taken from the clear statements in the papers and are
not the personal perception of the authors.
3.1. Operational analysis
3.1.1. Problem formulation and solving
The problem of operational analysis is to calculate the values of state
parameters in an IEN, i.e. voltages in electricity, pressures in gas and
mass flow rates and temperatures in heat/cooling networks. Once the
values of the state parameters are calculated, the values of energy flows
within the IEN are obtained. In this way, a suitable understanding of the
performance of the IEN in terms of energy trilemma and operability of
the IEN without violation of operational constraints is obtained.
In order to perform operational analysis, the set of equations of
balance of power/gas flows at the buses/nodes of the electricity/gas
network are formed. Then, the equations are re-written in terms of the
state parameters in each network.
For the heating or cooling networks, the set of equations of balance
of mass flow rate of hot or cold water at the nodes, the correlation be-
tween mass flow rate, load, and difference of temperature at the loads
and the equations for losses of heat in the pipes are formed. These
equations already contain the state parameters of heating or cooling
network.
Regarding the coupling components, since the value of the energy
flow on one side is known and input to the problem, the value on the
other side can be calculated and considered as the load or generation in
the corresponding network.
In order to solve the set of nonlinear equations most of the papers
have explicitly mentioned they have used Newton-Raphson method.
This is due to the fact that this method finds the problem solution with
local quadratic convergence irrespective of the size of the network
provided all the state variables are initialised with suitable values and
the Jacobian matrix is not singular at the solution point [201,202]. Once
the set of equations is solved, the values of state parameters in all the
networks and consequently the power/gas/hot or cold water flows in all
the branches of the IEN are determined.
In this way, it is possible to examine if the IEN is physically operable.
Also, it is possible to evaluate the performance of the IEN in terms of the
energy trilemma.
A summary of the popular methods used by the research community
for problem formulation and problem solving for operational analysis of
IENs is presented in Table 2. It can be seen that the problem can be
formulated either as: (i) sequential, in which the model of each network
is solved separately and the impact of coupling components is consid-
ered as load or source for the other network; or (ii) integrated, in which
the models of integrated networks with the coupling components are
considered as one model and solved as a whole.
3.1.2. Key findings
3.1.2.1. Flexibility of operation. Flexibility, as one of the elements of
energy trilemma, has been discussed frequently in the papers. There are
several options that provide flexibility to the operation of IENs, as
follows:
(i) Line pack storage, which is the amount of gas stored in a pipeline,
is one of the options that provide flexibility to the gas network as
well as to the other coupled networks. The difference between the
upper and lower line pack limits of the pipes (ΔLP) and the
amplitude of the line pack swing, impact the line pack flexibility.
In a ‘Gas based heating’ scenario studied in Ref. [13] it was found
that high heat demand levels lead to a reduction in ΔLP, and
hence to a reduction in the flexibility of the gas network. In this
scenario, these high heat demands also led to an increase in the
magnitude of the line pack swing. Therefore, the heat demand
levels need to be taken into account in order to evaluate the
flexibility of IEN operation. The method developed in Ref. [13] to
assess the flexibility may be used in scheduling of operation of
transmission network. Hence, it is possible to quantify the flexi-
bility in different regions using weather forecasts of day-ahead.
(ii) P2G facilities, which provide flexibility to the IEN especially at
higher levels of wind generation, reduce the power losses and
fluctuations of gas pressure [14]. These facilities, which are
alternative to gas network reinforcement, effectively benefit the
operation of both electricity and gas networks. This is due to the
fact that they contribute to the reduction of wind curtailment and
to the relief of congestion in the electricity network as well as in
the coupled networks to decrease the insecurity risks [15,16].
(iii) Any form of storage devices offers flexibility to the operation of
IENs. Different types of energy storage systems that are utilised in
gas, electricity and district heating networks are summarised in
Table 3. All these different forms provide support, in terms of
flexibility of operation, security of supply and affordability, to the
network that is utilising the storage device directly, as well as to
all the network(s) coupled to this network through coupling
components. It is shown in Ref. [17] that the heat networks can
be considered as thermal storage devices to some extent and
provide flexibility to other coupled network(s) through the qua-
si-dynamic 2  interactions, which can be used in security
enhancement. It is found that in smart energy systems, proper
control strategies, which have large influences on the
quasi-dynamic interactions, should be developed to use these
interactions for increasing IEN flexibility [17].
(iv) Compressors with dual flow capability can provide flexibility to
the IEN in order to accommodate the changes in supply in any of
the networks [18].
3.1.2.2. Security of supply.Security of supply is another element of
energy trilemma and is investigated frequently in the papers. It was
shown that IENs support one another in the case of occurrence of faults,
however, at a higher cost and emission condition [19]. It was demon-
strated that these faults can propagate from one network to the other
coupled networks and cause risks to the IEN operation [20]. Several
options were proposed in the literature in order to reduce the risk of
occurrence of faults and improve the security of operation of IENs, as
follows:
(i) Electrification: Electrification of heat and especially using hybrid
heating technologies can result in great reductions in GHG
emission of electricity and heat sectors and reduce conventional
generation peaks [21], which in turn contributes to the secure
operation of the IEN. It was suggested that a mixed combination
of technologies at district and local levels needs to be considered
to meet techno-economic and environmental performance targets
as well as to minimise the influence on the constraints of the local
network [22].
(ii) Storage: Adding storage in weak parts of the networks is an
effective way to decrease operational insecurity and strengthen
the system [23].
(iii) Correlations of pipeline parameters: Accurate estimation of dis-
tributions and correlations of pipeline parameters need to be
considered in order to reduce potential risks to operation of IENs
[24].
(iv) Operation mode of coupling components: The operation mode
influences the energy flows and IEN operation [25]. For example,
at the conditions of high heat demand, a CHP unit in the heat load
following mode may generate great amount of electricity and
export it to the grid and hence negatively impact the security of
supply of the IEN [26]. Considering all the above points can avoid
load contingency, which produces frequency deviation and gen-
eration re-dispatch that in turn changes the energy flow profiles
in the IEN that could cause critical operational condition for the
IEN [27].
3.1.2.3. Aspects impacting the energy trilemma
3.1.2.3.1. Interdependencies. Interdependencies and coupling com-
ponents of IEN allow for IEN to have interactions through these com-
ponents [28]. Disturbance from one network transmits to the other
coupled networks through these conversion components [17]. Also, high
loads in one network influence the energy flows of the coupled networks
through these coupling components [26]. Additionally, conversion
technologies at different levels in IEN significantly affect the
multi-energy flows in all the coupled networks, and subsequently the
IEN emissions and operational costs [22]. The influence of in-
terdependencies on the reliability of the IEN has been studied. Imple-
mentation of gas Demand Response (DR) provided additional resilience
for the gas network and the IEN, or gas storage increased the IEN reli-
ability [21]. Increasing the number/capacity of coupling components
will increase the impacts of failures in the gas network on the electricity
network in terms of decrease in the reliability of the electricity network
[29]. Moreover, failures in the electricity network can affect the reli-
ability of gas network when the power supply of facilities in gas network
is satisfied by electricity. Also, decrease in generation capacity in the
electricity network can significantly reduce the reliability of the coupled
gas network [29]. Failure in the electricity network was shown to
eventually have an effect on the gas system. However, due to the slow
dynamics of gas system, the failure in gas system will not be transmitted
to the coupled electricity network rapidly [30]. The heat generation
technology mix affects both gas and electricity networks as well as their
interaction and has impact on the overall IEN operational costs and
carbon footprint [31]. CHP units reduce the impact of voltage drop on
electricity networks [28] and CHP units with lower heat to electricity
ratios have a greater impact on the reduction of IEN losses, due to the
fact that the reduction in electric losses that CHP units provide out-
weighs the increase in gas losses [32].
3.1.2.3.2. Uncertainty. Uncertainty within IENs was another topic
investigated in the papers. There are several sources of uncertainty
within IENs including renewable energy output, the random outage of
generation units, and the random fluctuation of the loads. It was shown
that increase in the uncertainty range of these factors leads to great
fluctuation of the state variables of the nearby buses/nodes [33]. One of
the most important sources of uncertainty is uncertainty of wind, which
was studied in several papers. It was found that uncertainty of wind
leads to significant risks to the operational security of natural gas sys-
tems [34,35] and consequently to the security of real-time operation of
IENs [36].
3.1.2.3.3. Integrated modelling. Investigation of modelling aspects of
IENs in the papers have shown that all the networks need to be simulated
and analysed in an integrated manner. This is due to the fact that a
disturbance in one system can influence the other coupled systems.
Moreover, the disturbance propagates back to the system where it
initially occurred. Thus, a combined analysis of an IES is required, even
if the aim is to investigate the influences on the system itself where the
problem occurred [37]. Therefore, there is a need for integrated IEN
studies and energy system assessment for the evaluation of system
resilience [18] or system flexibility [13]. Additionally, it was shown that
in short term operation, steady-state gas flow models could provide less
accurate results due to the real-time imbalances of gas flow [36].
Therefore, dynamic or quasi-dynamic simulation needs to be imple-
mented especially in order to quantify the process of interactions be-
tween IENs [17].
3.2. Optimal dispatch
3.2.1. Problem formulation and solving
The problem of optimal dispatch in IENs is normally formulated as a
classical optimisation problem with the objective of minimisation of
operational costs or equivalently maximisation of social welfare subject
to operational constraints as shown in Equations.(1–3).
A summary of the popular methods used by the research community
for problem formulation and problem solving for optimal dispatch of
IENs is presented in Table 4.
3.2.2. Key findings
3.2.2.1. Flexibility of operation. Flexibility of operation of IEN was the
most important and frequent aspect investigated in the references. It was
shown that co-optimisation of IENs rather than optimisation of indi-
vidual networks separate from the other network(s) improves the
economy and flexibility of the IEN [101,104]. Also, different types of
energy storage devices in IENs contribute to the flexible operation of the
networks [87]. Inclusion of multi-type storage has also the benefit of
reducing the operational uncertainty and the operational costs of IENs
introduced by network constraints [105]. Additionally, comparison of
impact of P2G and DR in terms of impact on improving the flexibility has
shown that P2G has a greater impact compared to DR in terms of
improving the flexibility of IENs [106]. Furthermore, it was observed
that multi-directional compressors provide additional flexibility to the
gas network and hence reduce total operational costs and gas load
curtailment as a result of the network flexibility they offer [77]. One of
the options for GHG emission reduction that is gaining great attention, is
electrification of heat. However, it was shown that increasing flexibility
of the electricity network is necessary for electrification of heating for
GHG reduction purposes [57]. This flexibility can be provided by inte-
gration of heating system and gas system with the electricity system in
order to accommodate fluctuations in the electricity system [74]. The
dynamic of gas and line pack capabilities in gas networks can provide
flexibility and reliability for electricity networks in IEN short-term
operation [59].
3.2.2.2. Security of supply. Security of supply, and matching the supply
and demand, are important aspects discussed in the papers. Importance
of the integration of systems in terms of operation, planning, security
and reliability was investigated [95]. It was shown that combining gas
and electricity networks is important to evaluate energy conversion
between networks to minimise risk, ensure IEN security, and match
supply with demand whilst minimising cost for transmission [107].
Also, the security constraints of the gas network place limitations on the
IEN operation [108]. Additionally, it was found that while dynamic gas
system control and increased coordination of IEN each provide benefits,
both are essential for security and reduced operational costs in high
stress conditions [91]. Furthermore, it was shown that a natural gas
shortage will limit electricity generation of gas-fired units and increase
the total operational cost of the electricity network significantly [109].
Moreover, dual-fuel electricity generation units will consume an alter-
native and even more expensive fuel such as coal in order not to violate
the operational security constraints [110].
3.2.2.3. Aspects impacting the energy trilemma
3.2.2.3.1. Storage. Storage in IENs was another topic discussed in
several papers. In addition to provision of flexibility to the IEN, as dis-
cussed previously, storage in IEN decreases load curtailments and im-
proves IEN resilience against contingencies [100]. Gas storage in
particular is more effective in managing congested IEN [70] and could
greatly reduce shedding and operational costs [85], enhance system
resilience [71], and support the operation of IEN [85]. Additionally, it
was shown that gas storage in an IEN heavily dependent on gas imports
for electricity generation has the ability to hugely reduce the operational
costs of the coupled electricity network [56]. Furthermore, it was shown
that thermal storage has the benefits of reduction in total operational
cost, improving IEN reliability and capability in accommodating more
renewables [111]. Integrated analysis rather than analysis of individual
system separate from the other(s) is beneficial since it showed gas
storage led to decrease in electricity imports in extreme weather con-
ditions [56]. Also, storage could offer greater and safer use of the
hydrogen in the gas network [10].
3.2.2.3.2. Line pack. Line pack was another topic discussed in the
papers. Apart from being an intrinsic property of gas networks, which
contributes to the flexibility of gas networks and consequently to IEN as
discussed previously, it was shown that line pack also plays an important
role in balancing the production and consumption [90] and contributes
to reduction of costs and more economical dispatch [112]. The higher
the line pack of the system, the lower operational costs to meet the
demand [59]. Additionally, it was demonstrated the lower the line pack,
the more the gas supplied from other sources and storages, and hence
the more IEN operational costs [64]. In order to simulate the line pack
storage and investigate the time evolution of it, dynamic gas flow
models instead of steady state models need to be implemented [113]. In
this way, it is possible to assess the amount of line pack storage in each
single pipe [90]. This also provides the basis for studying security of
supply [113], which can be carried out by varying the gas supply profile
over the day and hence controlling and simulating the line pack and
pressures [114]. Another benefit of application of dynamic gas models is
in studying coordinated scheduling since steady-state gas models ignore
gas inertia and line pack. This may result in suboptimal or less accurate
short-term co-ordinated scheduling of IEN [112].
3.2.2.3.3. P2G. P2G was the most frequent coupling component
that was investigated in the papers. It was found that P2G facilities have
several benefits including mitigating congestion of gas network as well
as the IEN [10,90], avoiding wind curtailment [115], supplying gas
demand and improving wind accommodation [74,90], reduction of
operational costs of gas networks [115,116] and IEN [98,108,117,118],
reduction of IEN emissions [108,115] and enhancing the capability of
the IEN in comprehensive utilisation efficiency of energy [98,108]. The
above benefits allow for additional resilience in ability of the gas
network to provide the minimum required offtake pressure [10]. The
location of these P2G facilities has impact on their role [90]. P2G units
can support more cost-effective unit commitment scheduling by avoid-
ing the curtailment of surplus wind generation and converting it into
natural gas [96] and hence decrease revenue deficit at higher P2G ef-
ficiencies [102]. Furthermore, combined operation of the P2G and gas
turbine units can effectively weaken the under/over voltage issues
[102].
3.2.2.3.4. Renewable  generation. Although  different  types  of
renewable generation, including wind and PV, have been investigated,
wind generation has been more frequently explored in the papers
compared to other types of renewable generation. Wind generation is a
highly accessible option for decarbonising electricity and heat demands.
It was shown that the electricity generation costs and eventually IEN
operational costs reduce as the penetration of wind generation increases
[89,119]. Also, increased levels of uncertainty of wind generation lead
to increased levels of uncertainty of operational costs of IEN [60] and
hence to the higher system generation costs [120]. The disadvantages of
low wind penetration levels include more supply to gas turbine power
plants, more import of expensive electricity, less line pack and flexibility
in the gas network, more compressor power consumption and eventually
higher IEN operational costs especially in high demand conditions [61].
Several solutions were suggested for reduction of curtailment of wind
generation including: (i) P2G units can convert most of the surplus wind
into gas and heat [74]. However, due to high operational cost of P2G, to
ensure the benefit for both the wind farm and the IEN, cost-benefit
trade-off needs to be carried out between wind generation level and
IEN operational economy [103]. (ii) Producing hydrogen from elec-
tricity reduces wind curtailment in a high wind case and decreases
operational costs, GHG emissions and gas flow from gas sources [63]. It
was suggested to produce hydrogen at high wind regions by locating
electrolysers in those regions [63]. (iii) Increasing the heat pump ca-
pacity gradually decreases the rate of wind curtailment [121]. Also,
analysis of impact of correlation coefficients between different wind
farms on the operational costs showed that if the correlation coefficients
between wind farms are larger, the IEN operational costs will be larger
too [87].
3.2.2.3.5. Co-ordinated scheduling. Co-ordinated scheduling of inte-
grated networks was investigated in several papers. Comparison of co-
ordinated scheduling with co-ordination of networks separate from
one another showed that the case of co-ordinated scheduling leads to
lower emission and operational costs [122] and stays within the oper-
ational constraints especially with higher cost savings at higher load
levels [67]. A study with DR found that co-ordinated gas-electricity DR
achieves a better IEN economy than single electricity DR or single nat-
ural gas DR [60]. Additionally, it was shown that co-ordinated sched-
uling, which can better handle the inaccuracy of forecasting [73], could
help the IENs relieve a contingency in one network, which also impacts
operation of the other coupled networks, with lower operational costs
compared to non-co-ordinated scheduling [68]. To ensure all the
aforementioned benefits of co-ordinated scheduling, gas and electricity
Transmission System Operators (TSOs) need to closely collaborate and
co-ordinate [113], which is further discussed in section 4.
3.3. Optimal planning
3.3.1. Problem formulation and solving
The mathematical model for optimal planning of IENs is similar to
traditional planning of gas, electricity or heat networks, which can be
formulated as a typical optimisation problem. However, compared with
the traditional approach, there are more decision variables, more
comprehensive objectives, more complex constraints, and higher
uncertainty levels in planning models of IENs.
A problem of optimal planning is formulated with the target of
minimisation of Net Present Value (NPV) of sum of all the expansion
costs consisting of investment costs (or capital costs, CAPEX) and
operational costs (OPEX), or maximisation of NPV of social welfare of
IEN over the planning horizon subject to operational and investment
constraints, as follows:
Elements of the energy trilemma are considered either in the
objective function or in the constraints to link the models to the analysis
and scenarios.
A summary of the popular methods used by the research community
for problem formulation and problem solving for optimal planning of
IENs is presented in Table 5.
3.3.2. Key findings
3.3.2.1. Flexibility of operation. It was shown that all the energy storage
systems contribute in the long term to avoid energy deficiency and
hence to increase economic savings [177]. Among different storage
types, additional gas storage facilities could enhance gas availability and
line pack during periods of high gas load levels [165]. Also, gas storage
devices are effective in mitigating the impact of uncertainty of the de-
mand on the long-term planning of IENs and in enhancing the security of
energy supply [169]. It was found that in the co-planning, line pack
varies and decreases more in high load conditions [167]. Also, P2G units
can support IENs to benefit from more RESs penetration, delay elec-
tricity transmission lines construction [190], decrease costs and emis-
sions, and increase heat profit of IENs [198]. Additionally, compressors
can postpone building gas pipelines and hence decrease IEN costs [190].
3.3.2.2. Aspects impacting the energy trilemma. It was found that heat
demand needs to be considered in operational planning of the flexibility
of IENs [13]. Also, in order to consider the uncertain future demand and
generation, stochastic solutions need to be investigated, which present
the lowest expected cost for this purpose [176], and hence does not
result in any load curtailment [164]. It was also found that demand
uncertainty impacts the operational cost and not the investment cost
[160]. Moreover, the more the reliability of satisfying the stochastic
demand, the more the investment cost. Especially in IENs where the
electricity network is highly dependent on the gas system, increasing the
reliability of the gas system significantly increases the reliability of the
whole IEN [169]. Also, increase in the level of stress within the IEN
increases both the cost of operation and investment [184]. It was found
that N-1 contingency of natural gas transmission network has large
impact on planning of IENs, especially in the regions with limited nat-
ural gas resources [170]. Also, it was shown that installation of new
pipelines or incorporation of fuel switching capabilities are effective
solutions to relieve fuel supply constraints and reduce the total opera-
tional costs [191].
3.3.2.2.1. Co-planning. Co-planning of IENs has been compared
against sequential or separate planning in several papers and several
benefits in terms of above aspects around the energy trilemma have been
investigated. It was found that co-planning of IENs finds a solution with
the following characteristics compared to sequential or separate plan-
ning, due to the fact that it considers strategically all the networks and
their interactions:
lower total costs (investment and operational) [158,167,168,170,
171,174,179–183,186,188,190,193,197], or equivalently higher
social welfare [194–196]. Especially the higher load growth rates,
the higher benefit to cost ratios [167]. This is due to the fact that IEN
has an infrastructure capable of levelling the loads in different vec-
tors and hence it can relieve transmission stress and postpone con-
struction investment and operational costs [172,174].
lower carbon emissions [167,189].
less load curtailment [171,181].
higher robustness and reliability levels while accommodating
different uncertainties in the IEN [167,172,179,185,189,195,196].
Also, if operational constraints are neglected, e.g. power imbalance is
allowed, then the total cost decreases since certain investments can
be avoided [190].
more flexible [196] and enhanced resilience levels [186].
less transmission and energy losses [181,196] and hence higher ef-
ficiency of the energy grids and better infrastructure utilisation ef-
ficiency [162,181,189,195,196] due  to maximised transfer
capabilities within all the vectors [196].
3.3.2.2.2. Networks interactions. Natural Gas-fired Power Plants
(NGPPs) have been investigated more compared to other possible
coupling components for the operational planning of IENs in the liter-
ature. It was found that installation of NGPPs reduces investment [158]
as well as the total operational costs, since this guarantees security of the
electricity network [170] and NGPPs and system transmission capacity
are efficiently utilised [167] (despite the growth in operational costs of
the gas network due to building more infrastructure [192]). Also, it is
necessary to integrate more NGPPs to increase the reliability over the
planning horizon [159,179]. Additionally, the sensitivity of the inte-
grated networks design to the confidence level is dependent on the
quantised size of the candidate NGPPs and the level of the electricity
demand [179]. It was found that the constraints of transport of natural
gas has influence on the planning of the electricity system, especially in
regions where the candidate NGPPs depend massively on a constant
supply of natural gas [191].
4. Research needs, gaps and future research direction
recommendation
The systematic review has identified the following gaps for future
research in operation, dispatch and planning of multi-vector energy
networks.
4.1. Smart energy management framework
There is a need for development of advanced control and manage-
ment frameworks in order to perform online optimal dispatch of IENs
based on historical and online data that are further processed by Arti-
ficial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) techniques. This
framework needs to be deployed through Internet of Things (IoT)
framework since there is a growing attraction in online acquisition and
storage of data in IoT frameworks. Additionally, energy networks are
becoming more integrated through several coupling components. As a
result of vector integration using ICT systems and data collection
through IoT frameworks, cyber attacks are considered as a potential
threat to the operation of multi-vector energy networks. Therefore, IoT-
driven control and management frameworks for IENs considering AI, ML
and cyber security assessment needs to be investigated and deployed on
multi-vector energy networks with a single owner for test and validation
purposes (Fig. 8). In this way, the studies that have been carried out on
security and resilience of future electricity grids [204] can be further
extended to future IENs.
4.2. Organisational and regulatory barriers for the future integrated
control rooms
The benefits of integrated optimal planning and dispatch of energy
networks have been investigated in several publications and have been
summarised in this paper. However, in reality these networks, which are
coupled at several locations, are planned and operated separate from
each other in transmission level all the way to medium level distribution
level since they are owned, operated and governed by different com-
panies/governments/regulators. As a consequence, if a fault/contin-
gency occurs in one of the networks, the operator of that network
attempts to find the solution within that network, whereas, the other
coupled network(s) might be able to provide some support/service to
relieve this affected network (Fig. 9). However, integrated control and
management of coupled networks in one central location has not yet
been investigated, due to the following facts: (i) each energy network
has its own control room separate from the control room of the other
coupled energy network(s); (ii) organisational policies, procedures and
regulation of each network operator is different from the other one. In
order to benefit from the advantages of integrated planning, dispatch
and control of coupled energy networks, the operators of the networks
need to be in one central location and communicate with each other in
order to find a practical solution for planning of the networks or for
fault/contingency relief in case of occurrence of any fault/contingency
in either network.
Hence, some relevant questions need to be considered in the phase of
designing the control rooms of future such as:
• How well do the tasks and roles in different control rooms
correspond?
• Are there different levels of urgency or extent of active intervention
needed?
• At what scale of production does gas-for-storage become significant
on either side?
• What regulatory, market or institutional factors might affect co-
operation?
• How could control room practices be adapted to enable new possi-
bilities for energy storage?
4.3. Impact of uncertainties on the trilemma evaluation of performance of
IENs
Impact of uncertainty of renewable generation and loads on the
energy trilemma have been investigated in several publications. How-
ever, uncertainties of the following have not yet been evaluated:
(i) The physical characteristics of the energy networks and coupling
components normally deteriorate over time. No models have yet
been developed to correlate the impact of aging of the physical
assets on deterioration of physical characteristics of the networks
and hence on the operation and energy trilemma;
(ii) Dynamic behaviour of the networks have been investigated in
several papers. However, ideal networks with perfect assump-
tions have always been considered for this purpose. These model
simplifications and perfect assumptions help a model to run and
produce results faster. However, this happens at the expense of
some uncertainty in the results based on which the operator of the
network wants to make the right decision at the right time.
To conclude, there is a need to evaluate the extent of impact of these
modelling uncertainties on the energy trilemma performance evaluation
of IENs to obtain a tolerance range when reporting the performance of
IENs. This especially applies to high level integrated networks such as
transmission or high level distribution networks, where great amounts
of energy carriers are transmitted over long distances and even minor
miscalculations can have great consequences on the energy trilemma
performance evaluation of IENs (Fig. 10).
4.4. Economics of energy system integration
Several technical benefits around the elements of energy trilemma
have been investigated for integrated operational analysis of coupled
networks by different researchers, which have been summarised in this
paper. However, networks operate under the constraints of market,
regulatory, and policy frameworks through price signals, taxes, and
other incentives [205]. The more integration of the networks, the more
complexity is introduced in the linkages between the operators of the
coupled networks. There is, therefore, a need to investigate which level
(i.e., transmission or distribution) and to what extent is best to have
more integration in the networks in order to better resolve the energy
trilemma challenges and to explore whether the economic network
integration benefits can be improved through amendments to market,
regulatory and policy constraints. If one of the levels was found as the
best level to have more integration, then what would be the added value
of integration of operation in the other level in terms of the marginal
benefits for the whole energy system.
4.5. Deployment of smart multi-energy regions
With increasing linkages between gas, electricity and district heating
networks, deployment of smart multi-energy in regions rather than
districts is gaining attention in the energy research community [10,
105]. The very first challenging step to deploy these regions is devel-
opment of models for optimal planning , dispatch and operational
analysis of these regions. However, there are several challenges associ-
ated with this step, which need further investigation and are summar-
ised as follows:
(i) Developing dynamics of the gas and district heating networks [4];
(ii) Convergence and optimality of the solutions of the models
without compensation for accuracy [4];
(iii) TEE impact of renewable energy generation at the building level,
e.g. PV and solar thermal, on the IENs [28];
(iv) Development of control strategies that can be used for close-to
real-time simulation [28];
(v) TEE impact analysis of the flexibility offered by P2G on operation
of the IENs [22,57];
(vi) Forecasting the demand (heat and electricity) and optimum uti-
lisation of the flexibility of the multi-energy system [13];
(vii) Quantification and evaluation of the TEE impact of natural di-
sasters on the resilience of the smart multi-energy IENs [18]; and
(viii) TEE evaluation of benefits of seasonal storage and the impact on
the IENs while transporting the gas produced by P2G to the
seasonal storage facilities [10].
5. Conclusions
This paper summarises the most important findings of recent litera-
ture on analysis of multi-vector energy networks, rather than energy
hubs, in relation to the elements of energy trilemma: flexibility of oper-
ation, security of supply and affordability. The reviewed papers have been
classified into three groups: (i) Operational analysis; (ii) Optimal
dispatch; and (iii) Optimal planning. The focus of this paper has been on
energy networks since the main parts of the whole energy system that
connect the natural resources and import to the final energy user are
energy networks including gas, electricity and district heating/cooling
networks along with the couplings and interactions that occur between
them both at transmission and distribution levels. Also, the focus of this
paper has been on key findings rather than the energy models since the
models developed for simulation and analysis of Integrated Energy
Networks (IENs) have been reviewed in several other literature. The key
findings of the most recent papers have been explained in relation to the
elements of energy trilemma. The main driver for this paper was to
identify the gaps in the state of the art in the area of multi-vector energy
networks research and to articulate this through the lens of the energy
trilemma.
The paper makes recommendations for future research priorities
including: development and demonstration of cyber resilient smart en-
ergy management frameworks, ways to overcome organisational and
regulatory barriers for future increased energy network integration,
uncertainty analysis of the future performance of IENs, potential eco-
nomic value of energy systems integration and deployment of smart
multi-energy regions.
The paper provides useful insights for the energy research commu-
nity by presenting several novel ideas for future research and facilitating
the path to a decarbonised economy, due to the comprehensive sys-
tematic review that has been carried out.

