      Effects of electric fields on onset of dropwise condensation based on Gibbs free energy and availability                                                                                       analyses

Abstact
    A thermodynamic model based on changes in Gibbs free energy and availability is developed in this paper for onset of condensation of supersaturated or saturated vapor under electric fields. Both homogeneous condensation and heterogeneous condensation on subcooled surfaces are considered. Effects of contact angle, subcooled wall temperature and the strength of the electric field on heterogeneous condensation are illustrated. The results of these analyses show that an electric field can decrease the critical radius and promote onset of droplet condensation in a supersaturated or saturated vapor.

Introduction
    As early as in 1871, Thomson performed an analysis on thermodynamic equilibrium of vapor liquid interface with curvature and gave the initial form of Kelvin's equation, which describes the critical radii for onset of droplet condensation. Based on a grand potential analysis, Vorob'ev and Malyshenko concluded that external electric fields stimulated both bubble nucleation and onset of condensation. Warshavsky and Shchekin studied uniform electric field's effects on droplet shape and analyzed the change of chemical potential and the work required for droplet formation, and they proved that electric fields enhanced onset of droplet condensation. Gao et al. Used Monte Carlo method to simulate onset of condensation under two conditions: they found that an electric field promoted onset of condensation under the condition of fixed vapor chemical potential, but it prohibited onset of condensation under the condition of fixed temperature or pressure. All of these papers focused on effects of electric fields on onset of condensation in an environment with uniform temperature. 
    In this paper, we study the effect of an electric field on heterogeneous droplet condensation on a subcooled surface in a supersaturated or saturated vapor based on thermodynamic analyses, taking into consideration the wall temperature gradient and the contact angle of the subcooled surface. The critical radii for droplet condensation and bubble nucleation under the same degree of subcooling and superheat are first field is found to promote droplet condensation, which is in agreement with previous analyses. 

Onset of homogeneous condensation under an uniform electric field
    Consider the most simple case of homogeneous condensation in which droplet is condensed in a supersaturated vapor at a uniform temperature Tv and at a pressure pv, (which is higher than the saturated pressure ps corresponding to Tv) under an external imposed electric field.The chemical potential in a fluid under an external electric field with strength E can be written as. Where E is the strength of an imposed electric field, ¶≈ is the dielectric constant of the fluid, ¶Õ, ¶Ã, h, s are respectively the specific volume, the chemical potential, specific enthalpy and the specific entropy of the fluid. The change in specific Gibbs free energy after and before condensation is. where ¶≈ and ¶≈ are the dielectric constants of liquid and vapor respectively; El and Ev are the electric field strength imposed on liquid and vapor, respectively. The first term on the right hand of Eq. (2) can be calculated as: where Ts is the saturated temperature corresponding to vapor pressure pv; cpl and cpv are respectively specific heats of liquid and vapor at constant pressure, hlc and hvc are respectively the critical specific enthalpy of liquid and vapor at an equilibrium state where Tl = Tv. The second term on the right hand side of Eq. (2) can be calculated as. where hgf=fhfg is the latent heat from vapor phase to liquid phase; pl and pv are respectively the pressure inside and outside the liquid droplet.
Substituting Eqs. (3a), (3b), (3c) and (4) into Eq. (2) and setting El = where ¶§T = Ts fTv N 0, ¶≈L and ¶≈G are the relative dielectric constant of liquid and vapor respectively, for which ¶≈l = ¶≈L¶≈0 and ¶≈v = ¶≈G¶≈0, with ¶≈0 = 8.85 °¡ 1012 F/m being the vacuum permittivity. The relative dielectric constant of vapor ¶≈G is regarded as a constant (which is listed in Table 1) and is independent of temperature. However, the relative dielectric constant of liquid is temperature dependent, which can be expressed as. It follows that the change in Gibbs free energy for the whole droplet is:where pl and pv are determined from the modified Young Laplace equation in an electric field. We can numerically calculate the critical radius for homogeneous condensation of droplet (rc1) at different electric field strengths by setting Eq.(7) equal to zero, i.e. The results of calculations, based on physical properties of water and water vapor listed in Table 1, are presented in Fig.1, where it can be seen that the critical radius for onset of homogeneous droplet condensation decreases with the imposed electric strength. If there is no electric field, i.e., E = 0, Eq.(10) with the aid of the Clausius Claperon equation gives, which is the Kelvin equation for critical radius for onset of homogeneous condensation of droplet. It is interesting to note that if Tv, pv, ¶—l in Eq. (11a) is replaced by Tl, pl, ¶—v, respectively, the resulting expression is identical to the critical radius for homogeneous bubble nucleation. Thus, expressions of critical radii for onset of homogeneous condensation of droplet and for homogeneous nucleation of bubble can be interchangeable after a simple substitution if the temperature of the environment is uniform. It is interesting to note from Eqs.(11a) and (11b) that the critical radius is inversely proportional to its initial phase's density respectively. The initial availability of the system (i.e., vapor at Tv and pv) can be expressed as. After droplet condensation occurs, the availability of the system with liquid, vapor and interface can be calculated as follow:It follows that the change in availability during homogeneous con- densation is the sum of Eqs. (13)®C(15) minus Eq.(12) to give. Eq. (16) is presented in Fig. 2, where it can be seen that the peak value of availability change decreases with the electric field's strength. The peak value of availability represents the energy barrier of phase change because nature process will always tend to decrease the availability. Accordingly, the critical droplet radius (rc2) for onset of condensation of droplet can also be calculated as,  It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the condensation will have smaller energy barrier and smaller critical radius in a stronger electric field. This means that an electric field promotes homogeneous condensation of droplets. Fig. 3 shows changes in Gibbs free energy given by Eq. (7) and avail- ability given by Eq. (16) versus droplet radius during homogeneous condensation of droplet under the condition of Tv = 90 °„C, Ts = 100 °„C, and E =1 °¡ 107 V/m. The two critical radii rc1 and rc2 in homogeneous condensation of droplet obtained respectively by Gibbs criteri marked in Fig.3. It can be seen that the critical radius obtained from ability criterion (rc2). It follows that Gibbs criterion is the necessary con-dition for onset of dropwise condensation, and the availability criterion is the sufficient condition. This conclusion is similar to those given by Dong et al for bubble nucleation. which is higher (or equal to) than the saturated pressure ps(Tv). It is assumed that: (i)The external electric field is uniform. (ii)The liquid droplet's temperature at height x is the same with the vapor temperature at the same height, i.e., Tv(x) = Tl(x) and temperature changes linearly from Tw to Ts, i.e. where Tv(xd) = Ts corresponds to the saturation temperature of the atmosphere vapor pressure. So, the temperature gradient k is: where xd is the height of the droplet, and ¶» is the contact angle of the substrate.
The temperature on top of the condensation droplet equals to the saturation temperature Ts corresponding to the environment vapor pressure at the onset of condensation; Next, consider the problem of onset of heterogeneous condensation of droplet on a wall (at x = 0) at a subcooled temperature Tw and with contact angle ¶». Next to the wall is a semiinfinite extent of supersaturated (or saturated vapor) at a temperature Tv, and at a pressure pv
    The change in Gibbs free energy during heterogeneous condensa- tion of droplet on a subcooled wall can be obtained by integrating the specific Gibbs free energy change for the droplet's mass to give: where ¶§T(x)= Ts Tv(x), ps(Ts) and ps(Tw) are the saturated pressures of water vapor corresponding to temperature Ts and Tw respectively. It should be noted that for the special case of ¶» = 180°„, Ts = Tw = Tv, ps(Tw) = ps, and ps(Ts) = pv, Eq. (20) will be reduced to the case of homogeneous condensation given by Eq. (7). According to Eq. (10), we can determine the critical radius (rc1) numerically. The results of this calculation for Tw=90 °„C, Ts=100 °„C and ¶» = 60°„ are presented in Fig. 4, which shows that an electric field also promotes onset of heterogeneous condensation of droplets.
    The availability of initial state consists of the vapor phase and interface is: After condensation occurs, the availability of the system consisting of vapor, liquid and interface are given by: where the volume of the droplet and areas of interfaces are: and we can get the value of ¶“lv°‰ from Eq. (9) for which the contact angle of the droplet under an electric field can be calculated as: Substituting Eqs. (25)®C(29) in Eqs. (21)®C(24), we can obtain the total availability change during heterogeneous condensation of droplets:
    Fig. 5 shows the change in availability during heterogeneous con- densation for Tw = 90 °„C, Ts = 100 °„C and ¶» = 60°„ in different electric fields with strength of  0, 1 °¡ 107 V/m and 4 °¡ 107 V/m. It can be seen that the onset of condensation in a stronger electric field has a smaller energy barrier and a smaller critical radius, so an electric field also enhances onset of heterogeneous condensation of droplets. Fig. 6 shows the changes in Gibbs free energy and availability given by Eqs. (20) and (30) respectively during heterogeneous condensation of droplets for E =1 °¡ 107 V/m, Ts = 100 °„C, and Tw = 90 °„C. Comparing this figure with homogeneous condensation under same conditions (E =1 °¡ 107 V/m, Ts=100 °„C, and; Tv = 90 °„C, i.e., subcooling degree
to be 10 °„C) shown in Fig. 3, it can be seen that the peak value of availability change in heterogeneous condensation of droplets in this figure is about 5 °¡ 10^20 J, which is smaller than that of homogeneous condensation of droplets (about 4 °¡ 10^19 J) shown in Fig. 3, and the corresponding critical radius of heterogeneous condensation is about 1.2nm as compared to homogeneous condensation critical radius of 1.3nm. Thus, under an electric field, homogeneous condensation of droplets is more difficult to occur than heterogeneous condensation of droplets under the same temperature conditions.

Onset of heterogeneous condensation without electric fields
    We now consider the special case of heterogeneous condensation of droplets without an electric field. For this purpose, we set E = 0 in Eqs. (20) and (30) to give the changes in Gibbs free energy and availability for heterogeneous condensation of droplet on a subcooled substrate with temperature Tw and contact angle ¶»: Eqs. (31a) and (31b) versus the droplet radius are presented in Fig. 7, which shows changes in Gibbs free energy and availability during het- erogeneous condensation of droplets in a supersaturated (or saturated vapor) without an electric field. Setting Eq. (31a) equal to zero, the critical radius for the simple situation of onset of heterogeneous condensation of droplet with no electric field (E = 0) is simplified as. Setting ¶» = 180°„, Ts = Tw = Tv, ps(Tw) = ps, and ps(Ts) = pv in Eq. (32), the result will be reduced to the most simple case for homogeneous condensation given by Eq. (11a). The critical radius rc2 can be obtained from Eq.(31b) according to Eq. (17). It can be shown from Fig. 7 that the critical radius rc1 is less than the critical radius rc2 although the difference is small. It should be noted that Quan et al. have derived the following expression for critical radius for heterogeneous nucleation of bubble with no electric field (E = 0). Under no electric field, a comparison of critical radii for droplet condensation (with a subcooling of 10 °„C) given by Eq. (32) and bubble nucleation (with a superheat of 10 °„C) given by Eq. (33) is presented in Fig. 8. It is interesting to note that the critical radius for onset of droplet condensation is much smaller than the critical radius for onset of bubble nucleation because the density of liquid is much larger than that of vapor. Fig. 8 also shows that onset of droplet's critical radius increases with the contact angle, which means that condensation is more prone to occur on a hydrophilic surface. However, the critical radius for bubble nucleation decreases with the contact angle, meaning that boiling bubble is more prone to nucleate on a hydrophobic surface. From Eqs. (32) and (33) we note that the two expressions of critical radii for onset of  dropwise condensation and bubble nucleation are not identical, because the two processes of bubble and droplet formation are not exactly opposite. This is reflected in the changes in specific Gibbs free energy during heterogeneous condensation of droplets and heterogeneous nucleation of bubbles are not exactly the opposite. For the onset of heterogeneous condensation, the specific Gibbs free energy change is where pl is a function of radius and calculated by Young Laplace equation, ps (Ts) equals to the vapor pressure pv. For heterogeneous nucle- ation of bubbles, the specific Gibbs free energy change is: where pv is a function of radius and calculated by Young Laplace equation, ps (Ts) equals to the liquid pressure pl. The difference in specific Gibbs free energy's expressions for onset of condensation and boiling nucleation will lead to a difference in total Gibbs free energy changes, so the expressions for critical radii in these two cases are not exactly opposite.

Conclusions
    In this paper, we have developed a thermodynamic model to explore the electric field's influence on onset of condensation. Gibbs free energy analysis and availability analysis have been applied to obtain critical radii of dropwise condensation and the energy barrier for onset of condensation. From this analysis, the following conclusions are obtained:
    An electric field can promote onset of homogeneous heterogeneous condensation of droplets, reflecting in a decrease of both critical radius and nucleation energy barrier.
    Critical radii for onset of dropwise condensation have been obtained from Gibbs free energy criterion and availability criterion respectively. It is found that the former is always smaller than the latter, so Gibbs free energy criterion is the necessary condition while the availability criterion is the sufficient condition for onset of condensation. This conclusion for droplet condensation is similar to those given by Dong et al for bubble nucleation.
     Under the same temperature conditions and the same electric field, it is found that onset of homogeneous condensation is harder to occur than onset of heterogeneous condensation, reflecting in a higher energy barrier and a larger critical radius than heterogeneous condensation.