Effects  of wall  temperature on slagging and  ash  deposition of Zhundong coal  during circulating fluidized bed  gasification
Xiaobin Qi a,b, Guoliang Song a,⇑, Weijian Song a,b, Shaobo Yang a,b, Qinggang Lu a
a b s t r a c t  ：
Zhundong coal  with a large reserve is faced severe ash-related problems including slagging and fouling during pulverized-coal boiler combustion. The  gasification in  circulating fluidized bed is a good way to use Zhundong coal  due to the low  reaction temperature, while it is  unknown for  the slagging and ash deposition mechanism of Zhundong coal  during circulating fluidized bed gasification. In this paper, the gasification of  Zhundong coal  was tested in  a 0.4 t/d CFB test rig  simulating the real industrial device. Ash  deposition probes were installed along the gas  flow  direction to characterize its  slagging and ash deposition at different wall temperatures. These probes were treated with three cooling methods (no cooling, air  cooling or  water cooling) to reach different wall temperatures (882–737, 665–429 and 81–45 °C). The  results reveal that deposition was affected greatly by  wall temperature.  Mineral elements including Na, Ca, Fe, Al and Si were likely to accumulate in  deposits on  high-temperature  surfaces, and existed in  the forms of  silicates and sulfates at wall temperature  above 882 °C, resulting in slagging. Although the contents of most mineral elements in  the deposits on  cooled surfaces were always low,  a large gas-wall temperature gradient triggered the condensation of  gaseous species, such as  Na,  Cl and K. The  CaSO4  and CaO in  gases were condensed and restructured in  an  ordered crystalline array on  the surfaces of ash particles, forming a coating layer that made the ash particles stickier. Chemical composi- tion and crystallographic analyses show that the properties of deposits on the probes and gas-borne ashes were different. More mineral phases as well as sodium were present in deposits. Additionally, due to the Cl enrichment on  air-cooled surfaces, the corrosion of the metal surfaces should be  focused.
1. Introduction
The Zhundong coalfield, which is a very  large coal  deposit still under exploration, is potentially an important coal mining resource in  West China  [1].  The  coal  reserves in  this coalfield were esti- mated to  be  390  Gt. The  high volatile content, low  ash  and sulfur contents, and high reactivity make Zhundong coal  a potential sup-ply   of  gas   fuels,   liquid  fuels,   hydrogen, electricity, and  other chemical materials. However,  due to  the insufficient understand- ing of its characteristics, the utilization of Zhundong coal  is limited by  the occurrence of  severe slagging and fouling [2,3].  To better understand  and  resolve these  two  problems,  researchers  have tested Zhundong coal  extensively, but mostly in  laboratory-scale furnaces [2,4–8]. The main cause for slagging and fouling of Zhun- dong coal is attributed to the richness of alkali-alkaline earth metal (AAEM) elements, particularly Na.
Na  affects slagging and fouling mainly in  two aspects: (1)  its high chemical reactivity with other minerals leads to  formation of  eutectics  [3,4,9] and  (2)  it  is  strongly prone to  sublimation [2–4,8]. Na in  the coal  may also  be  involved in  complex transfor- mation reactions and partially ends up  in  the form of  silicates and sulfates. At melting temperature below 1000 °C, sodium sili- cates would mix  with iron,  calcium, or magnesium oxides to form eutectics. These eutectics easily adhere  to  and slag  in  the coal burners of industrial pulverized coal-fired boilers [10].  Moreover, they cover the surfaces of bed  materials or  ash  particles to  form adhesive coating layers, leading to  agglomeration or  even de- fluidization [9,11,12]. Additionally, during thermal coal conversion, Na is easily released through fast  de-volatilization. The Na vapors will nucleate/condense to form sticky fine particles, thus accelerat- ing the ash deposition in the boilers [2,4]. In Zijing bituminous coal, a  type of  Zhundong coal  containing 12.77 wt% Na2O  in  coal  ash, volatilized Na content was  maintained at 20–55 wt% during com- bustion at 400–1000 °C, in  which Na  volatilization was  kept at a high  level   within  600–900 °C  [8].   Volatilized  Na   will   adhere, through  sulfation [10]   or  condensation, to  the  heated surfaces and other ash  particles to  form a  sticky inner layer on  the bare heating surfaces or to form a sticky coating surface of bulk ash  par- ticles, which are  considered as two necessary aspects of ash  depo- sition [4].  Therefore, the existing research is  focused on  the Na release and transformation during the high-Na coal  thermal con- version [8,13–15]. To date, the most effective resolution in indus- trial  boilers  is   co-combustion  with  other  coals  [2,16].  Some additives, such as clay [11,17], kaolin [6] and gibbsite [17], are used to  restrain agglomeration during the fluidized bed  combustion  of high-alkali coal.  These Al-rich additives could react  with  Na  to form high-melting-point aluminosilicates, partly restraining foul- ing  and slagging.
Recently, there are  some studies about the slagging and fouling of Zhundong coal.  The sintering experiments of Zhundong coal  ash under an  O2/CO2   atmosphere in  a  laboratory-scale sintering furnace (over 1200 °C) show that all sintered coal  ashes were layered in different colors [5].  The  relative contents of Si, Ca, Al and Fe in the oxyfuel combustion atmosphere were all different compared with the air-firing atmosphere. During pulverized coal  combustion of high-Na lignite in  a 25 kW  down-fired furnace, Zhundong coal slagged significantly around 1150 °C on  the walls near the burner inlet due to  the formation of  low-melting-temperature  wollastonite and other eutectic mixtures [4]. The mechanism how AAEM species  accelerate  ash   deposition  can   be   summarized  in   two aspects: (1) formation of a sticky inner layer on the bare tube surface and (2) formation of a sticky coating surface of bulk ash  particles.  Wang et al. investigated the mechanisms underlying the Ca/ Na/S/Cl  transformation and ash  deposition in  both full-scale and laboratory-scale furnaces, and found sulfate condensation at about
850  °C was  pivotal in ash  deposition [2]. Wu et al. reported the ash deposition behaviors of  Zhundong coal  in  a  3 MWth   pilot plant facility, and found the Fe-/Ca-bearing minerals and sulfates promoted slagging and ash  deposition [18].  However, among these studies, the most recent work was  carried out  at high temperature (over 1000 °C) during combustion of Zhundong coal.  As reported, ash   deposition  on   convective heat  transfer  surfaces could be cleaned using the conventional soot-blowers by  controlling the flue  gas  inlet temperature [19].  Due  to  low  reaction temperature of  CFB, the reduction of  low-temperature eutectics might remit the slagging and ash  deposition of  Zhundong coal.  Thus,  CFB is highly potential  for   utilization of  high-sodium  Zhundong  coal. We  previously investigated the Na transformation during gasification/combustion [20]  and compared the slagging behaviors among three types of Zhundong coal containing different sodium contents in a 0.25  t/d CFB test rig [21].  It was  found Na behaved differently under these two reaction atmospheres: Na  migrated from Zhundong coal  to deposit mainly in the form of Na2SO4  during combustion, but in the form of NaCl during gasification. The properties of Zhundong  coal  exploited  from  different  coalfields  vary  consider-ably.  Such  variation is contributed to the formation of morpholog- ically  different slags,   in  which the Na/Si  ratio in  Zhundong coal plays a very  important role.  Zhundong coal  with high volatile con- tent is a good  gasification fuel. Gasifying Zhundong coal by CFB and gradient  utilization  of   the  gas   and  gasified  fly   ash   are   new attempts. A series of studies are  needed to  realize these attempts. To date, there is  rare research about Zhundong coal  gasification and even less  report about the effects of wall  temperature on slagging  and deposition during CFBG of Zhundong coal.
In this work, the CFBG of a type of Zhundong coal  was  tested in a 0.4 t/d CFB test rig. The slags  and deposits were sampled by ash deposition probes, whose temperatures were controlled by  water or  air  in  order to  reach different wall   temperatures. To  further reveal the mechanisms of  slagging and fouling, we  analyzed the morphology, chemical compositions and crystalline phase of both slags  and deposits. The aim  of this work is to characterize the slagging  and ash  deposition during CFBG of Zhundong coal  and to pro- vide  guidance for  industrial application of  Zhundong coal  in  the future.
2. Experimental

2.1. Materials

The proximate and ultimate analyses as well  as ash  composition of Zhundong coal  are  presented in Table  1. The relatively low  ash and high volatile contents make Zhundong coal  suitable for gasification, but the high Na2O content in ash  (up  to 7.28%) indicates the possible occurrence of slagging and ash  deposition during gasification. The  experimental coal  was  sieved to  the size  of 0.1–1.0 mm before each experiment.
The important role  of Al2O3  in inhibition of de-fluidization has been reported  extensively [6,11,17]. Thus,  Al-enriched bed  mate- rial containing 90.05% Al2O3  and 7.69% SiO2  was  used in this study, which was  sieved to  0.18–0.71 mm.


2.2. Test system

The  gasification experiments were undertaken in  a 0.4 t/d CFB test rig (inner diameter 150  mm; height 4.4 m).  The test rig  (brief schematic showed in Fig. 1) has  a coal  feeding rate of 0.4 t/d.
The  test system is equipped with thermocouples and differential  pressure sensors along the riser height. Its  main pipelines are coated with high-temperature-resistant cotton in  order to  minimize heat loss during operation. The fuel was  ignited at the startup stage by the external heating provided by heating wires.
All of the data, including temperature, pressure and air volume- flow  rate, were collected and displayed real-time by  a Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) data acquisition system.

2.3. Sampling system and  analyses

For a better comparison, the T1-measured bed  temperature was stabilized at ~935 °C for  ~8 h  in  each test. The  details of experimental conditions are  shown in Table  2.
Ashes  were sampled from positions P1–P9 as  shown in  Fig. 1. Ashes  in  positions P1–P4 were sampled by  sampling cans, which were each controlled by a valve independently. Ashes  in positions P5–P8 were  collected by  temperature-controlled ash   deposition probes (schematic diagram illustrated in Fig. 1) cooled by different media (e.g.  air,  water or  nothing), and were used to  characterize the coal slagging and fouling. The inner and outer surfaces of probe walls were each installed with a  thermocouple to  measure wall temperatures.  The   two  thermocouple-measured temperatures were averaged to  be  the wall  temperature of  the corresponding probe. The  probes are  composed of a fine  heat-resistant material– stainless steel Cr25Ni20 (GB/T20878-2007).
Ashes  in position P9 were collected by  an  ash  sampling probe, which was  purged by  N2  in  advance. This  operation ensures the sampling is valid.  Before  the condition stabilized, the ash  sampling probe contained a large amount of unwanted ash.  To collect more valid  ash,  purging the sampling probe must be  carried out.  Mean-while, N2, an inert gas, has  no effect on the atmosphere around the ash. The gas composition in position P4 was  also  detected by a portable infrared gas  analyzer (Gasboard-3100P).
The  microtopography of the samples and element distribution at some interest  points were analyzed on  a  scanning electron microscope with an  energy dispersive X-ray  spectrometer  (SEM- EDX;  S-4800, Hitachi,  Japan). The  compounds of  samples were detected on  an  X-ray  diffractometer (XRD; PANalytical, Nether- lands). The  chemical components of  some samples were deter- mined via  an  X-ray  fluorescence meter (XRF, XRF-1800,  Japan).

3. Results and discussion

3.1. Deposition tendency at  different wall  temperatures

According to the gas  properties shown in Table  3, it is believed that the ash  deposition probes for the three tests were maintained at almost the same reducing atmosphere.
Since   the experimental conditions were similar among the three tests, the temperature curves along the rise  (T1–T5) coincided  perfectly  (Fig.  2).  The   wall   temperatures  were  different among the adiabatic, air-cooled and water-cooled probes. Under the action of  thermal radiation, the thermocouple-measured gas temperatures were affected by  the cooled probes. Thus,  the temperature  difference was   enlarged gradually from position P5  to P8 (i.e. T6, T7, T9 and T10).
The  wall  temperatures varied among the adiabatic,  air-cooled and water-cooled probes owing to the different thermal conductivities of the cooling media. For the uncooled probe which could be considered as adiabatic, the wall  temperatures in positions P5–P8 ranged  from 882   to   737  °C  (Fig. 3a),   which were  only   several degrees to  dozens of  degrees lower than the corresponding gas temperatures  (891–774 °C).  The   wall   temperatures  of  the  air- cooled and water-cooled probes were 665–429 °C and 81–45 °C, respectively, which were largely lower compared with the adiabatic case.
The ash  deposition probes along the gas flow direction are  illustrated in Fig. 3b. The amount and morphology of deposits both differ among probe types and change with wall  temperature. A small amount of slags  is found only  on the adiabatic probe in position P5, but fine  ash  particles are  evenly distributed on  the surfaces of the two cooled probes in positions P5 and P6. It is indicated the cooled probes can  capture more ash  particles than the adiabatic one.  The deposited amounts on each probe increase gradually from position P5 to  P8.
Slagging and ash  deposition are  affected by  the adhesion force between  heating surfaces and  ash   components,  especially  Na- based compounds [22].  The  ash  particles on  the probes certainly contain viscous materials that melt easily at ~900 °C, such as silicates and sulfates [9,23]. The  gaseous alkali metal elements after approaching the cooled surfaces would be  condensed to  be  adhesive   among ash   particles,  thereby  promoting deposition [4].  In the two cooled cases, fine  ash  particles were transported by  thermophoresis, a phenomenon in which fine or aerosol particles move against the temperature gradient and ultimately deposit on  low-temperature surfaces.
The formation of a fouling layer on a probe aggravated the thermal  resistance and thereby decreased heat flux.  The  heat flux reduction was  reflected by  the temperature change. However, because of the small amount of deposits on the probes, the temperature changes were not  obviously different among the three cases. Therefore, the temporal variation of temperature only  in  position P8  under the air-cooling condition is  illustrated in  Fig. 4,  where G/WT  is  the gas/wall temperature around/of the ash  deposition probe in position P8, and DT is the temperature difference between them. Generally, the temperatures  in  position P8  including gas temperature and wall  temperature varied slightly, which is consistent with the small thickness of  the fouling layer. At  the initial deposition stage, the wall  and gas  temperatures tended to  rise  to a thermal equilibrium with smaller difference between them. As ash  deposition continued, the thermal resistance was   enhanced, leading to  the decrease of  wall  temperature  and the increase of temperature  difference. With the progression of  deposition, the contact area between ash  particles was  enlarged and the deposits became dense. In  consequence, the thermal conductivity was increased [24].  Thus,  at the final  depositing stage, the wall  temperature rose  slightly again and the temperature  difference was diminished.
3.2. Microstructure and  crystalline phase  of deposits

Fig. 5 shows the micro-morphology and element distribution of deposits on the probes in position P5. Granular slags  appear on the adiabatic probe (Fig. 3b)  and are  covered with obvious melting as indicated by  SEM image. EDX shows that large amounts of Ca, Si, Na, Fe and S are  distributed on  the slag  surfaces, indicating these elements are  fluxing materials [4,5,25,26]. The  agglomerated and melted particles are  primarily formed from eutectic compounds, silicates and (composite) sulfates, which reduce the melting point of deposits. Special attention should be  paid to  iron,  which functions as a flux agent during the deposition. In addition, no chlorine is found on the particles, indicating it is still  gaseous at 882  °C. The major mineral phases of  the slags,   detected by  crystallographic analysis, are  SiO2, Al2O3, Ca2Al2SiO7  and Na2Al2Si3O10 (Fig. 6). The Al-rich material  used in  these experiments effectively captured sodium  to   form  high-melting-temperature  refractory  minerals [27,28]. However, the further increase of sodium atop the Al-rich grains would convert these refractory minerals to fluxing minerals. It could be  deduced that an  interaction between sodium and Al- rich  bed  materials occurred from surfaces inward to the inner part, just like  the interpenetration between Na2O in Zhundong coal  and quartz sands (SiO2) [21].  The dominant component inside the gran- ular salgs  was  still  Al2O3. Thus,  the presence of Al2O3  in the granular  slags  indicates it served as a skeleton of slagging. Ca2Al2SiO7, a common fluxing material in the slags  of Zhundong coal,  tended to appear at high temperature [5,24]. Na2Al2Si3O10 resulted from the reaction among Na-based compounds, SiO2  and Al2O3.  Formation of Al-containing compounds indicates that high sodium in  Zhundong coal  could consume Al gradually. In addition, many sodium compounds were still   not   detected by  XRD because of  the low crystallinity.
Na-  and  Si-rich particles  also   appear in  the deposits of  the air-cooled probe  in  position  P5  (Fig. 5b).   These particles were considered to  reserve strong viscosity at the gas  temperature  of
903  °C, like  under the adiabatic condition. However,  no  slagging occurred, indicating slagging was  inhibited by  the low  wall  temperature (~665 °C). One  explanation is  that those agglomerated and melted particles became less  viscous once they contacted with the low-temperature walls. The  weakened viscosity is  unable to produce enough adhesion force  that can  prevent the fall-off of particles from the  probe induced by  the  airflow collision or  self- weight. As  reported, the deposited ashes became heavier with the rise  of  probe temperature through a  drop tube furnace [25], which was  attributed to  the higher viscosity of the ashes on  the higher-temperature  surfaces.
A large amount of  fine  particles were adsorbed onto the surfaces  of both the air-  or water-cooled probes due to  the temperature gradient (Fig.  5).  These cooled surfaces were a  good   home for  volatile components. Fig. 5c  shows the SEM-EDX results of an ash  particle sampled from the water-cooled probe in  position P5. Despite small amounts of Ca, Si, Fe and S on  the surfaces, the Na and Cl contents are  still  very  high (9.05% and 13.54% respectively) compared with Fig. 5a.  Volatilized-Na content  was   up  to  50% at 900 °C,  and Cl  was   more  volatile [8].  It  is  believed that  large
amounts of Na and Cl are  still  gaseous at about 900 °C. These gaseous components were condensed on  the surfaces of the fine  particles absorbed by the cooled probes. The Na/Cl molar ratio on the particle surfaces is 1.03,  meaning a high possibility of Na  and Cl being condensed to  NaCl. The  Cl enrichment is a potential threat to  the metal heating surfaces [29].  The  condensed Na  severs as an  adhesive between fine  particles. 
Fig.  7  shows an  ash   particle with a  coating layer. The  local amplification shows that the smaller particles lean on  each other orderly and closely to  form a coating layer. EDX shows abundant Ca and S appear on the layer surfaces, indicating a higher probability that the smaller particles are  composed of CaSO4. Moreover, the Ca/S atomic ratio is 1.80  in area 2 and 1.65  in area 3, which means still a large amount of Ca exists in other forms. CaO is the most possible form in  addition to  CaSO4.  Chemical fractionation analysis shows that 66.6% of Ca in  Zhundong coal  is organically bounded [4] and this part of Ca is decomposed to oxides at low  temperature (<900 °C) [30].  At the reducing condition, another possible form of Ca is atom, which, together with CaO and CaSO4, is released from the raw coal  into gases. These components, when meeting low- temperature  surfaces or  when at low  gas  temperature, are  condensed to an ordered crystalline array on the surfaces of ash  particles.  These calcium species deposited  on  the surfaces of  fly  ash particles, making the ash  particles on  the heating surfaces stickier [2].  Under the combustion conditions, the clusters of  fine  CaSO4 particles  were  also   observed at  the  flue   gas   temperature   of 507  °C, in which the CaSO4  was  considered to  result from the sulfation of CaO [3].
3.3. Property changes of deposits along  the  gas flow direction

The morphologies of slags  and deposits along the gas flow direction are reflected by chemical compositions, which are related with the decreasing temperature [2].  As shown in  Fig. 8, the chemical compositions of the deposits change with temperature in different ways among the three conditions. For the adiabatic condition, the top  two elements in most deposits are  Ca and S, corresponding to the Ca- and S-rich raw coal.  This  indicates that CaSO4  contributes to  the deposition. With the temperature drop, Na,  Fe, Ca, Si and Al contents were all reduced from position P5 to  P8, especially in the interval from P5 to P7, i.e. the wall  temperature decreases from
882  to 804  °C. In contrast, the contents of other elements such as Cl and K were the lowest (~0) in position P5, and increased with the decreasing wall  temperature, which indicates Cl and K were gaseous at 882  °C and began to  condense below 804  °C. The  S, Ca, Fe and Mg contents decreased, but were still  higher than those under the air/water cooling conditions in  the corresponding positions.
Thus,  it is believed that S, Ca, Fe and Mg are  more likely  to  enrich on  the high-temperature surfaces.
Additionally, under the adiabatic condition, Na, Al, Si, S, Ca and Fe  contents in  the deposits were all  maximized at position P5 under all the three conditions, which explains the distinctive morphology. As reported, the ash  richer in Ca, Fe and Mg melted more easily [25].  When approaching high-temperature surfaces, these elements formed surface-adhering eutectic compounds which then combined with the strongly affinitive S to form low-melting- temperature sulfates.
Under the air-cooling condition, the Fe and Al contents declined with the decreasing temperature, but were maintained at lower levels compared with Ca, S, Si and Mg. Moreover, the contents of Na, Cl and K all increased much with the decreasing temperature, probably because they tend to  condense on  cooled surfaces [2]. Fe, Ca, S, Si, Al and Mg contents under the water-cooling condition were all lower compared with the other two conditions, suggesting there  is   no   temperature-dependent   regularity  below  100 °C.
However, the wall  temperature below 100 °C could still  stimulate the condensation of Na, Cl and K.
The above discussion suggests that the properties of the deposits changed significantly along the gas flow  direction. Especially at high  wall    temperature   (882–737 °C),  mineral  elements  were enriched more easily on  these surfaces. With the decrease of wall temperature,  Na,  Cl and K contents increased modestly, but the contents of most other mineral elements decreased evidently. In a  biomass furnace, medium-heated  surfaces below 900 °C were the major regions for  deposition [31],  which is  consistent with the fact  that the largest changes of mineral contents occurred at
882–804 °C.
The  changes of mineral phases in ashes with the gas  temperature were investigated via  XRD. Due  to  small number of samples, no   deposits  in   positions  P5–P7 were  detected  by   XRD.  Thus, Fig. 9 only  shows the XRD patterns of ash  samples from positions P4 and P9, whose major mineral phases are  CaSO4  and CaO, which is consistent with Fig. 7. Na4SiO4  and MgO were only  detected in  ash   samples from position P4,  indicating these mineral species were probably captured by  metal surface to s from position P4  P9. Since  Na, Ca, and Mg were more inclined to  reside in fine  particles [32],  the fine  ash  particles escaping from the cyclone were rich  in alkali metal compounds. These fine  particles adhered onto metal surfaces to  form the initial ash  deposition layer [33].  Especially   among  minerals,   the  presence of  alkali sulfates  greatly enhanced the adhesion force  between ash  and metal surfaces [22].
3.4. Differences  between ash  and  deposits 
Deposits originated from the fly ash  particles in  gases. To further understand the mechanism of deposition, we  compared the properties between deposits and fly  ash.  The  ash  at position P4, which fell  into the sampling can  gravitationally, was  representative  of  the fly  ash  in  the flue  gas.  The  chemical compositions  of ash  and deposits are  shown in  Fig. 10.  In these experiments, the contents of S, Ca and Fe all increased with the rise  of wall  temperature.  Especially, the  contents  of   these  elements  in   deposits exceeded those in  ash   only   under  the adiabatic condition. This indicates  that  S,   Ca   and  Fe   migrated   easily  to    the  high- temperature surfaces, but hardly to the low-temperature surfaces. As  reported,  alkali metal  compounds selectively adhered  and deposited onto metal surfaces [33].  Na,  K and Cl in  all  deposits (especially the air-cooled deposits) were more sufficient than those in  ash,  which proves that the corresponding gaseous components or fly ash  particles enriched in Na, K and Cl would gather on metal surfaces. Since  the air-cooling condition is  similar to  the actual industrial boiler, attention should be  paid to  the Cl-caused corrosion   of  deposits. Additionally,  alkali-metal-sulfate-caused  corrosion  might occur during the combustion of Zhundong coal  [34].
XRD reveals more mineral phases in deposits than in ash  (Figs. 9 and 11).  Besides CaSO4  and CaO detected in ash,  all deposits contain Ca2SiO4,  Ca3Mg(SiO4)2,  MgO  and NaCl.  The  presence of NaCl in deposits further proves that Na and Cl are  condensed in the form of  NaCl.  Ca3Mg(SiO4)2,  which resulted from the reaction among SiO2, MgO and CaO, was  also  detected in Zhundong coal  ash  under an oxyfuel  combustion  atmosphere  [5].   Ca3Mg(SiO4)2     would decompose to  Ca2SiO4  at ~1200 °C.
At 600 °C, the CaCO3   in  coal  would decompose to  CaO, which reacts with other mineral species to  form more complex minerals[2,5].  CaO in adiabatic deposits shows a lower XRD peak and thus is very  reactive with other mineral compared with that in  cooled deposits. Additionally, low  wall  temperature prevented the participation of SiO2  and Al2O3  during other chemical reactions, resulting in  their high XRD intensities in  water-cooled deposits. The  presence of Na4SiO4   in  deposits on  both the adiabatic and air-cooled probes indicates that high temperature surfaces could easily capture sodium silicates.
In  general, more mineral phases are  present in  deposits, and mineral elements such as  S, Ca  and Fe  are   prone to  enrich on high-wall-temperature  surfaces. Attention should be  paid to  chlorinous corrosion under the air-cooling condition.

4. Conclusions

The effects of wall  temperature on  slagging and ash  deposition during circulating fluidized bed  gasification of Zhundong coal were investigated. The main conclusions are  listed below.

(1)  Deposition was  greatly affected by  wall  temperature.  Slagging  occurred on  the surfaces at above 882  °C. As the gas- wall  temperature gradient was  enlarged, fine  particles were captured and deposited onto cooled surfaces. Deposition affected wall   temperature in  return and thus destabilized the heat flux.
(2)  The enrichment of Ca, Si, Na, Fe and S was  the main cause of slagging on  the high-temperature  surfaces. Volatile species such as  NaCl were condensed on  cooled surfaces and thus contributed to  deposition. Ca was   condensed and restructured in an ordered array to form a coating layer on ash  particle  surfaces, making ash  particles stickier.
(3)  The  contents of  mineral elements decreased along the gas flow  direction. The largest content changes occurred within the wall  temperature of 882–804 °C. The  contents of these elements were always low  at below 737  °C. However, gaseous Na,  Cl and K were condensed to  deposits along the gas  flow  direction.
(4)  The properties of deposits and ash  were very  different. More mineral phases were present in  deposits. Mineral elements such  as   S,  Ca  and  Fe  tended  to   enrich  in   deposits  on higher-wall-temperature  surfaces. Attention should be  paid to  chlorinous corrosion under air-cooling condition.


