Previous numerical simulations have shown that vortex breakdown starts with the formation of a steady axisymmetric bubble and that an unsteady spiralling mode then develops on top of this. We investigate this spiral mode with a linear global stability analysis around the steady bubble and its wake. We obtain the linear direct and adjoint global modes of the linearized Navier每Stokes equations and overlap these to obtain the structural sensitivity of the spiral mode, which identifies the wavemaker region. We also identify regions of absolute instability with a local stability analysis. At moderate swirls, we find that the m 1 azimuthal mode is the most unstable and that the wavemaker regions of the m 1 mode lie around the bubble, which is absolutely unstable. The mode is most sensitive to feedback involving the radial and azimuthal components of momentum in the region just upstream of the bubble. To a lesser extent, the mode is also sensitive to feedback involving the axial component of momentum in regions of high shear around the bubble. At an intermediate swirl, in which the bubble and wake have similar absolute growth rates, other researchers have found that  the wavemaker of the nonlinear global mode lies in the wake. We agree with their analysis but find that the regions around the bubble are more influential than the wake in determining the growth rate and frequency of the linear global mode. The results from this paper provide the first steps towards passive control strategies for spiral vortex breakdown.Key words: instability, vortex breakdown, wakes/jetsIntroductionIf a jet of fluid rotates with sufficient azimuthal velocity (swirl), a stagnation point and a recirculation bubble form within it, around one or two jet diameters downstream from the start of the jet. In this paper, the transition from the flow without a breakdown bubble to the flow with a breakdown bubble is labelled axisymmetric vortex breakdown. Furthermore, in some conditions the steady flow around this vortex breakdown bubble is unstable to helical perturbations. In this paper, the development  of these helical perturbations on top of the vortex breakdown bubble is labelled spiral vortex breakdown.Vortex breakdown was first observed in the flow over a gothic wing at high angles  of attack by Peckham & Atkinson (1957). The spiral mode was first identified by Lambourne & Bryer (1961) in the flow over delta wings. Since then, several different forms of vortex breakdown have been observed in a variety of experimental settings? Email address for correspondence: such as tubes, nozzles and combustion chambers. Investigators often observed the axisymmetric and spiral modes of breakdown to occur almost simultaneously. Some saw spiral breakdown before axisymmetric breakdown, while others saw axisymmetric breakdown before spiral breakdown. This led to disagreements over the nature of vortex breakdown (see reviews by Hall 1972; Leibovich 1978; Escudier 1988; Lucca- Negro & O＊Doherty 2001).Two main explanations have been proposed for vortex breakdown: hydrodynamic instability (Ludwieg 1960) and a supercritical to subcritical transition (Benjamin 1962). Experimental evidence reviewed by Escudier (1988) indicates that the flow upstream of the breakdown bubble is marginally stable or completely stable. Together with the fact that the onset of vortex breakdown is sudden, this suggests that hydrodynamic instability is not responsible for causing axisymmetric vortex breakdown. Benjamin (1962) compared vortex breakdown to the hydraulic jump seen in channel flows. He proposed the idea of vortex breakdown being a transition from a super-critical flow configuration to a sub-critical flow configuration and derived a criterion for vortex breakdown.Numerical studies allow vortex breakdown to be studied in a more controlled manner. Grabowski & Berger (1976) observed axisymmetric breakdown bubbles in their steady incompressible simulations and tried, unsuccessfully, to apply Benjamin＊s criticality criterion to these flows. Over the next 20 years, increased computing power led to a large number of numerical studies in which vortex breakdown was simulated in a variety of domains (Spall & Snyder 1999).  More recently,  Ruith  et al. (2003) carried out both steady axisymmetric and unsteady three-dimensional direct numerical simulations of vortex breakdown using the inlet flow profile defined by Grabowski & Berger (1976), which is labelled the Grabowski profile. They  used constant inlet conditions and open lateral boundary conditions. They showed that Benjamin＊s criticality criterion works when applied locally to the flow profiles upstream of breakdown. Following this, Vyazmina et al. (2009) studied the bifurcation sequence of axisymmetric vortex breakdown using the Grabowski inlet profile. Apart from noting that axisymmetric vortex breakdown is a robust transition phenomenon from one steady state to another, we do not investigate it further here.Ruith et al. (2003) considered the local absolute/convective stability (Huerre & Monkewitz 1990) of the flow field created by the axisymmetric vortex breakdown. By comparing the flow profiles to those of a Batchelor vortex, they concluded that spiral breakdown is caused by a sufficiently large pocket of absolute instability in the wake of the axisymmetric breakdown bubble. They also obtained eigenfunctions corresponding to a helical (with azimuthal wavenumber m 1) and double-helical breakdown mode (m 2). The minus sign indicates that the spiral winds in the opposite direction to the swirl.Gallaire et al. (2006) performed a local stability analysis of the flow fields obtained by Ruith et al. (2003) using linear direct numerical simulations (lDNS). For a particular swirl parameter, they found two regions of absolute instability, one centred on the bubble and one centred on the wake that develops behind it. By using the frequency selection criterion of Pier, Huerre & Chomaz (2001) and by comparing the spatial growth rate obtained from the local analysis with amplitudes extracted from Ruith et al＊s DNS results, they interpreted spiral vortex breakdown as a nonlinear global mode that arises from the region of absolute instability in the wake of the bubble. Meliga & Gallaire (2011) performed a linear global stability analysis around the vortex breakdown bubble and its wake. They confirmed that spiral vortex breakdown is caused by an unstable eigenmode. The growth rate and frequency from their global stability analysis agreed well with the growth rate seen in Ruith et  al＊s DNS. Recently, these researchers have extended their analysis to consider weakly nonlinear mechanisms that are responsible for competition between the helical and double-helical breakdown modes in the Grabowski family of flows (Meliga, Gallaire & Chomaz 2012).In this paper, we investigate spiral vortex breakdown in laminar, incompressible flows by performing linear global stability analyses around the vortex breakdown bubble and its wake. In contrast to Meliga & Gallaire (2011) and Meliga et al. (2012), our aim is to determine the regions that are most influential in causing spiral breakdown as observed in the simulations of Ruith et al. (2003) and to identify the physical mechanisms that are responsible for causing it.For this purpose, we use the linear direct and adjoint global modes to obtain the structural sensitivity of the flow (Hill 1992; Giannetti & Luchini 2007). This provides  a two-dimensional map of the wavemaker region of the flow, showing the regions of the flow in which force每momentum feedback has most influence on the frequency and growth rate of the mode. We also perform a local stability analysis, which allows us   to work out which regions of the flow are absolutely unstable and extract local spatial growth rates of perturbations, given the frequency of the global mode. This is a useful diagnostic tool, particularly in identifying the wavefront of the nonlinear global mode.  We compare our results with those of Ruith et al. (2003) and Gallaire et al. (2006) and, although we agree with Gallaire et al. (2006) that the nonlinear behaviour is governed by the wake, we discover that the linear behaviour is governed by the bubble  for moderate swirls.This study is at Reynolds number Re 200 and the primary motivation is scientific. There are important industrial motivations, however. Vortex breakdown occurs in wingtip vortices behind aircraft, in vacuum cleaners, and in gas-turbine combustion chambers. In the case of combustion chambers, hydrodynamic instabilities in the flow can lock into acoustic resonances within the combustion chamber, causing high- amplitude thermoacoustic instabilities, which can be catastrophic. This fundamental study of spiral vortex breakdown will reveal the regions of the flow that are responsible for these hydrodynamic instabilities and could help designers to control them, either actively or passively. Methodology
 First we calculate a steady base flow using the nonlinear Navier每Stokes equations.  Then we consider infinitesimal perturbations to this base flow and use a global stability analysis to calculate the direct linear global modes that would grow or decay on this base flow. We also calculate the corresponding adjoint global modes, which can be overlapped with the direct global modes in order to reveal the wavemaker region   of the flow. Finally, we perform a local stability analysis on the base flow. The two-dimensional global modes have already been calculated with the global analysis so we use the local analysis as a diagnostic tool, rather than as a predictive tool. This reveals the regions of the flow that are absolutely unstable and adds physical insight to  the results of the global analysis.The domain and the governing equationsWe study the motion of a viscous fluid in a cylindrical domain with length Xmax and radius Rmax, using cylindrical coordinates (x, r, 牟 ). The flow has density 老, pressure p,
.temperature T, and velocity u(ux, ur, u牟 )T. The inlet boundary, at x  0, is labelled  ?in. The outlet boundary, at x Xmax, is labelled ?out. The lateral boundary, at  r Rmax, is labelled ?lat.We use a low-Mach-number (LMN) formulation of the Navier每Stokes equations because the code has already been validated (Nichols, Schmid & Riley 2007; Chandler et al. 2012) and because we will consider flows with non-uniform temperature  and composition next. In this paper, the density is uniform and the incompressible Navier每Stokes equations could have been used. In non-dimensional form, the LMN equations arewhere is the viscous stress tensor. The other non- dimensional variables and parameters are defined in table 1. The species equation has the same form as the temperature equation but is not used here and is omitted for brevity. In the uniform density case, 老  1, T  0 and S1  1 and the equations above  reduce to the incompressible Navier每Stokes equations.The direct and adjoint perturbation equationsWe obtain a steady solution to (2.1) using the procedure described in ∫ 3.1, and it islabelled u? , 老? etc. The evolution of small perturbations, which are labelled uJ, 老J etc.,on top of the base flow is governed by the linearized equations of motion:where mJ √ 老?uJ + 老Ju? is the linearized momentum and 而 J = 曳?uJ + (?uJ)T曳 ? 2(? ﹞uJ)I /3 is the linearized viscous stress tensor. This set of equations can be represented asequations linearized about the base flow. The density 老J is not included in the state vector because it can derived from the temperature TJ by using (2.2d ).These linear perturbations can be decomposed into Fourier modes in time and theazimuthal direction:q(x, r, 牟, t) = q?(x, r)eim牟+竹t,	(2.4) where m is the azimuthal wavenumber and 竹 考 i肋 contains the growth rate, 考 , and frequency, 肋. We study the linear dynamics of the flow by analysing the eigenvaluesof L. These are obtained by solving the matrix eigenvalue problem竹q? = Lmq?,	(2.5)where Lm is the linear operator for the azimuthal wavenumber m (see the Appendix,∫ A.1). Each of these eigenvalues has a corresponding two-dimensional eigenfunction, q(x, r). We label each eigenvalue/eigenfunction pair a direct global mode. If 考 > 0, the mode is linearly globally unstable. In this linear analysis, the flow tends to the form of the global mode with highest 考 in the long-time limit and therefore this mode determines the system＊s overall stability.We now define an inner product over a volume, V,where aH denotes the Hermitian (i.e. complex-conjugate transpose) of a. The linear operator, Lm, has a corresponding adjoint operator L+m , which is defined in terms of an inner product:This definition is valid for any pair of vectors, but it is convenient to express (2.7) in terms of the direct state vector, q?, and the adjoint state vector, q?+.The adjoint operator is derived from the direct governing equations by integration by parts. Chandler et al. (2012) found that the direct equations need to be rearranged into  a suitable form before deriving the adjoint equations. This is necessary so that the two  sets of equations can be solved using a similar algorithm, which reduces numerical errors that arise when solving the adjoint equations. The following set of adjoint LMN equations were found to be the most similar to the direct LMN equations:where 竹? 考 i肋 is the complex conjugate of the corresponding direct eigenvalue. The adjoint global modes are then given by the solution of the eigenvalue problem in (2.9c) (see the Appendix, ∫ A.2).The structural sensitivityThe structural sensitivity, as developed by Hill (1992) and Giannetti & Luchini (2007), is given by the dyadic product of the direct and adjoint momentum vectors, Sij mi (m+j )?.  The  components  of  this  complex-valued  3 3  tensor  show  how feedback between the components of the linearized momentum vector affects thegrowth rate and frequency of the global mode. Giannetti & Luchini (2007) used  the Frobenius norm of the sensitivity tensor to identify where a modification in the linearized equations produces the greatest drift of the eigenvalue and thereby reveal the region of the flow that acts as the wavemaker. In our case, this is equivalent to evaluating the expressionwhere m and m+ represent the l2-norm of the direct and adjoint global momentum vectors at each point in space (Chandler et al. 2012).
The local stability analysis
The local analysis is performed using the technique described in Juniper, Tammisola & Lundell (2011). As for the global analysis, the velocity and pressure fields are decomposed into a steady base flow and a small perturbation. For the local analysis,  we assume that the flow exhibits two well-separated length scales: an instability wavelength, 竹l, and a length scale that characterizes the streamwise non-uniformity of the base flow, Ll. The ratio 竹l/Ll, which must be small for a local analysis to be rigorously valid, is labelled ?. In the flows examined in this paper, ? is small in the downstream region but large in the upstream region. This means that the local analysis becomes invalid in the upstream region, and we find that it cannot predict the global  mode frequency and shape, as described in Juniper et al. (2011). Hence, we only use it to obtain the absolute growth rate at each streamwise location.Numerical implementationBase flowThe nonlinear governing equations (2.1) are solved by direct numerical simulation (DNS) with a modification of the code developed by Nichols et al. (2007). The equations are discretized on a collocated grid with Sx and Sr points in the axial and  radial directions respectively. Sixth-order compact finite-difference schemes are used to calculate spatial derivatives in the axial and radial directions. A spectral decomposition is used in the azimuthal direction. The coordinate singularity at r 0 (the centreline)  is treated using an asymptotic method proposed by Constantinescu & Lele (2002). The equations are solved using an explicit pressure projection method and time stepping is implemented through a fourth-order Runge每Kutta scheme. The coupling between the pressure and the momentum boundary conditions, however, restricts the code to being first-order accurate in time. Full details of the code and the nonlinear solution algorithm can be found in Nichols et al. (2007).On ?in, we impose the density and velocity profiles used by Grabowski & Berger(1976) and subsequently by Ruith et al. (2003). This Grabowski profile has uniform density, 老1, uniform temperature, T1, and uniform axial velocity, U1, beyond a characteristic radius R. Using these quantities as reference scales (table 1), the non- dimensional base flow inlet profile iswhere Sw is a non-dimensional swirl parameter and 汐 is a non-dimensional co-flow parameter. In this study, which is at Re 200, we keep 汐 1, which corresponds to a uniform axial velocity. In the past, the use of constant inlet conditions for simulating vortex breakdown has been criticized. However, Ruith et al. (2003) showed that this is a safe assumption as long as the inlet is super-critical, which is true for all the inlet profiles that we consider. On the lateral and outlet boundaries, we impose boundary conditions that model flow into a semi-infinite domain in the downstream and radial directions. For themomentum, we set a traction-free boundary condition on ?lat (而 ﹞ n? = 0 where n? isthe unit vector normal to the boundary) and a convective boundary condition on ?out (?m/?t Uc ?m/?x 0 with Uc set to the maximum outlet axial velocity). For the temperature, we use a homogeneous Dirichlet condition (T  0) on all boundaries. For  the pressure, we set p 0 on ?lat and ?p/?x 0 on ?in and ?out.The steady axisymmetric base flow,  satisfying (2.1) in the  limit ?/?t	0, is obtained by marching the equations forward in time, while constraining the flow variables to be axisymmetric at each time step. This works because the base flow is  stable to axisymmetric perturbations.Global stability analysisWe solve the discretized version of the eigenvalue problems (2.5) and (2.9c) using ARPACK, a software library that implements the implicitly restarted Arnoldi algorithm (IRAM) (Lehoucq, Sorensen & Yang 1998) in order to obtain the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of a standard eigenvalue problem. We obtain the matrix每vector products required by ARPACK using a time-stepping approach. Following Heaton, Nichols  & Schmid (2009), we use complex versions of the linear direct and adjoint codes developed by Chandler et al. (2012). Complex numbers are required in order to handle  the imaginary components that arise when non-zero azimuthal modes of swirling flows are considered.For the direct global mode, we use a homogeneous Dirichlet condition on ?in and?lat and a convective boundary condition on ?out for the momentum and temperature. The boundary conditions for the adjoint have to be chosen such that the boundary terms arising from the derivation of the adjoint equations (2.8) are zero. It is sufficient to use homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions for the adjoint momentum and temperature on all boundaries. The boundary conditions for the pressure in the linear  direct and adjoint codes are identical to those for the base flow. In this paper, wenormalize the direct and adjoint global modes so that (m? , m? ) = (m? +, m? +) = 1.Local stability analysisThe numerical procedure is identical to that in Juniper et al. (2011). At each streamwise location, the governing equations arising from ∫ 2.4 are discretized on  a Chebyshev-spaced grid in the r-direction. This produces a generalized matrix eigenvalue problem, which represents the dispersion relation for this slice of the flow. In this paper, 48 Chebyshev-spaced points are used between the centreline andtop wall, which is sufficient so that the eigenvalues change by 10?4 when the resolution is increased. We calculate the complex absolute frequency, 肋0, as a functionof streamwise distance, x, by finding saddle points in the complex k-plane and then checking that they are valid pinch points, as defined by Briggs每Bers. The procedure is described in detail in Juniper et al. (2011).ResultsIn this section, we begin by establishing the accuracy and reliability of our numerical procedures for a case with swirl parameter Sw 1.0 at Re 200 by comparing our results with those from previous studies. We then present the direct and adjoint eigenmodes at the point where the flow is just globally unstable and map out the regions that are most sensitive to external forcing and internal feedback. We use the structural sensitivity tensor to identify the physical mechanisms that determine  the global behaviour of the flow. Finally, we return to consider the case with Sw 1.0  in light of the previous sensitivity analysis.ValidationFigure 1 shows the steady base flow at Sw 1.0. There is an axisymmetric breakdown bubble around x 2, which creates a wake downstream. The streamline pattern and the size and location of the bubble match that obtained in previous axisymmetric simulations (Grabowski & Berger 1976; Ruith et al. 2003; Meliga & Gallaire 2011).  For this reference case, we calculate the base flow and linear global stability on three different meshes in order to assess the reliability and convergence of the results.  The linear global stability analysis predicts one unstable eigenmode for m 1 and no unstable eigenmodes for m 1. Table 2 compares the unstable global mode frequency obtained using these meshes with results from Ruith et al. (2003), Gallaire  et al. (2006) and Meliga & Gallaire (2011). The eigenvalue depends very weakly on  the grid resolution and spatial domain size and we conclude that mesh M1 is sufficient  for this study.Ruith  et  al.  (2003)  performed  fully  three-dimensional  nonlinear  DNS.  They perturbed the axisymmetric steady-state solution with white noise and then extracted the linear growth rate and frequency from the initial rate of increase of the kinetic energy per unit mass. Our eigenvalue is within 1.3 % of theirs. Gallaire et al. (2006) carried out a local stability analysis on the same axisymmetric steady-state solution and used the frequency selection criterion of Pier et al. (2001) to predict the frequency	The most unstable adjoint eigenvalue for m 1 and the discrepancy with respect to the complex conjugate of the direct eigenvalue, for meshes M1每M3. The discrepancy is abs(竹adj ? 竹?dir ) where 竹 √ 考 + i肋.of the nonlinear global mode. This is not expected to be exactly the same as the linear global mode but, nonetheless, is also close to our calculations. Meliga & Gallaire (2011) used a finite-element solver to obtain the base flow and global mode in a domain that was twice as long (axially) as that used in this study and by Ruith  et al. (2003). As the domain length increases, the convective non-normality of the linearized N avier每Stokes (N每S) operator also increases. This makes the eigenvalues more sensitive to perturbations and this could be the reason for the slight discrepancy between our results and theirs.Table 3 compares the linear growth rates obtained from mesh M1 with those in table 1 of Meliga & Gallaire (2011) and those in figure 28 of Ruith et al. (2003), for  three swirls and two azimuthal wavenumbers, m. As discussed earlier, the difference between Meliga & Gallaire＊s growth rates and ours can be attributed to the difference in domain lengths. Ruith et al.＊s extraction of the linear growth rate from the rate of growth of white noise works well near the point of linear stability, which is at Sw  0.915, because only the m  1 mode is unstable and this mode grows relatively  slowly. It becomes less accurate as the swirl increases, however, because the m 2mode also becomes unstable. The evolution therefore depends on how the initial white noise projects onto each of the modes and it is harder to distinguish between the growth rates of each individual mode. This could explain why Ruith et al.＊s growth rates at Sw 1.2 and Sw 1.3 are slightly different to ours. We conclude that the agreement is as good as can be expected.In the absence of truncation errors, the adjoint eigenvalues would be the complex conjugates of the direct eigenvalues. In this study, the adjoint equations are derived algebraically from the direct equations and then discretized, which means that the truncation errors of the adjoint algorithm differ from those of the direct algorithm. We must check, therefore, that the adjoint eigenvalues are close to the complex conjugate of the direct eigenvalues. Table 4 shows the adjoint eigenvalues and the discrepancyFIGURE 2. (Colour online) (a) Base flow at Sw  0.8944 and Re  200, (b) axial velocity  along the axis, r 0, (c) absolute growth rate of the dominant saddle point (solid line) and the next saddle point (shown by a dashed line where it is a valid pinch point and by crosses where it is not).with the direct eigenvalues for the three meshes. This discrepancy is due to the first-  order time accuracy of the numerical scheme and decreases as the time step decreases (Chandler et al. 2012). The discrepancy for mesh M1 is 0.2 %, which is sufficiently small for us to be confident that the adjoint eigenmodes are correct.Formation of a recirculation bubble and the onset of instabilityIn this study, we increase the swirl from Sw 0.8, which is stable and before the onset of vortex breakdown. At Sw 0.8944, a stagnation point forms on the centreline, which is the first sign of an axisymmetric breakdown bubble; figure 2. This agrees with the results of Ruith et al. (2003). The complex absolute growth rate, 肋0i, is obtained as a function of streamwise distance, x, using the local analysis. This reveals  that a region of absolute instability (which also exists for lower values of swirl) is centred around the bubble. The flow is globally stable, however, for all azimuthal wavenumbers, showing that this region of absolute instability is not large enough or strong enough to cause a global instability.As the swirl is increased, an unstable mode (考 > 0) first appears at Sw 0.915 withm 1. Figure 3 shows the base flow at this swirl together with the absolute growth rate, the unstable direct mode, the corresponding adjoint mode, and the structural sensitivity map. For the direct and adjoint modes, frames (c) and (e) show contours of the positive (solid) and negative (dotted) real parts of the azimuthal vorticity. (The imaginary parts have a similar structure but are a quarter wavelength out of phase.) The frames below, (d and f ), show the kinetic energy, Ek(x) Rmax u 2 r dr as a function of streamwise distance, and the contributions from the axial, radial, and azimuthal components. This is a convenient measure of the amplitude of the global mode.At Sw 0.915, the region of absolute instability around the breakdown bubble is sufficiently large to cause a global instability. The direct global mode starts to grow   in the bubble region and is amplified further in the wake region, reaching a maximum around x 12. It is worth noting that the wake region is convectively unstable, but not absolutely unstable. The adjoint global mode represents the receptivity of the direct mode to external forcing, or equivalently, the initial condition that most optimally excites the direct mode (Chomaz 2005). It is localized between the inlet and the upstream edge of the bubble. The spatial separation of the direct and adjoint global modes is characteristic of flows with convective non-normality (Chomaz 2005). For both the direct and adjoint global modes, the three velocity components have roughly the same order of magnitude, indicating that component-wise non-normality is not influential. If it were influential, one would expect different velocity components to dominate in the direct and adjoint global modes. The structural sensitivity map shows  that the wavemaker region, as defined in (2.10), is located just upstream of the breakdown bubble, in the region of absolute instability.4.2.1. Mechanisms of instabilityIn order to understand the physical mechanism by which a small perturbation to the linear operator affects the global mode, we consider the real and imaginary parts  of the nine components of the structural sensitivity tensor, shown in figures 4 and The nine components quantify the sensitivity of the eigenvalue to changes in the feedback between the three components of the perturbation momentum vector and the three components of the linearized momentum equations. The real part describes the sensitivity of the growth rate, while the imaginary part describes the sensitivity of the frequency. For example, figure 5(c) shows the effect of changing the amount of feedback from the streamwise momentum (mx) to the azimuthal momentum equation (m牟 ).It can be seen that these sensitivities are in spatial quadrature: the imaginary component is large where the real component is zero, and vice-versa. These oscillatory sensitivity patterns are characteristic of convective flows and are caused by constructive or destructive interference (Tammisola 2012). The global mode arises due  to contributions from feedback throughout the wavemaker region. These contributions interact constructively and destructively to give, in aggregate, a global mode frequency and growth rate. If the feedback at one point in this wavemaker region changes, then  the effect on the global mode will depend on the amplitude and the phase of the feedback from this point, relative to the aggregate feedback from the other points. The phase relationship of the feedback varies in space, so the effect of a small change in  the feedback at a point also varies in space.The phase information is interesting, but a clearer picture of the influences of feedback between the components is given by the absolute value of the structural sensitivity. This is shown in figure 6. In order to understand the physical mechanisms  that may be responsible for causing the global instability, it is worth comparing this with the nine components of the strain tensor of the base flow, ?ij u ( u) /2, which are shown in figure 7. The three frames along the leading diagonal show the axial, radial and azimuthal strain, while the off-diagonal frames show the shear. We will start by considering four features. Firstly, at the entry plane, there is strong shear  in the r每牟 component at the edge of the vortex core. Secondly, just outside the edge   of the bubble (at r  0.5), there is very strong shear in the x每r component and weak  shear in the r每牟 component. Thirdly, the frames in figure 6(a,d,g), which correspond  to the influences on the axial momentum equation, have high amplitudes in the region in which there is strong shear in the x每r component. Fourthly, the frames in the top  row of figure 6(a每c), which correspond to the influence of the axial momentum, have moderate amplitudes in this region.This can be compared with figure 8, which shows the nine components of the structural sensitivity tensor for the m 1 mode in two parallel flows. The nine components have the same meaning that they have for the two-dimensional case in figures 4每6: they quantify the sensitivity of the eigenvalue to changes in the feedback between the three components of the perturbation momentum vector and the three components of the perturbation momentum equations. The only differences are that the flow is parallel and that the perturbations are assumed to be of the form u exp(ikx)  in the axial direction. This gives the local structural sensitivity. If the flow were non-parallel, this would be a cross-stream slice through the two-dimensional structural sensitivity.The flow in figure 8(a) is a parallel non-swirling counterflow wake. This flow has uniform velocity in the axial direction and zero velocity in the radial and azimuthal directions. Therefore, all shear is concentrated in the x每r component and only the Kelvin每Helmholtz (KH) mechanism is active. The frames in the left column of figure 8(a) have high amplitudes in the region in which there is strong shear in the x每r component and the frames in the top row have moderate amplitudes in this region. It   is also worth noting that the r每r and r每牟 components have low amplitudes. The comparison with figure 8(a) leads us to believe that the feedback in this region is caused by the KH mechanism.Figures 6(e,f,h,i) have high amplitudes around the upstream stagnation point of the recirculation bubble. From figure 7, we notice that this does not correspond to regions of large shear. Hence, this cannot be explained by a KH mechanism. To explain this,  we consider the nine components of the sensitivity tensor for the m  1 mode in a flow with  solid-body rotation but no axial shear, shown in figure 8(b). For this flow, the highest sensitivities are in the r每r, r每牟 , 牟 每r and 牟 每牟 components, and they all have very similar magnitudes. This is typical of feedback that arises from the conservation of angular momentum. Specific examples of such a mechanism includethe fictitious Coriolis force (Batchelor 1967, ∫ 7.6) and the generalized centrifugal instability mechanism proposed by Leibovich & Stewartson (1983), who derived a criterion for the temporal instability of a parallel Batchelor vortex in the limit of large azimuthal wavenumber, m, and large axial wavenumber, k. In these limits,  the perturbation is only affected by the local flow. The perturbations in this paper,however, are far from the large m and k limit and are therefore not localized. Consequently, it is questionable whether they can be identified with the generalized centrifugal instability. Even if we ignore these concerns, we find, in this flow, that the criterion is only satisfied in regions of strong axial flow, where the perturbations have large group velocity. When deriving global properties from a local analysis, only the waves with zero group velocity contribute. On this basis, it seems unlikely that the generalized centrifugal instability is responsible for the strong feedback upstream of the breakdown bubble. We conclude simply that a mechanism involving conservation of angular momentum is active in the region just upstream of the breakdown bubble.We can now explain why the adjoint global mode is large in the region upstream of the recirculation bubble, near the centreline (figure 3e). Let us consider the effect   of a small open loop perturbation in this region. In this region, the axial vorticity of   the base flow is an order of magnitude larger than the radial and azimuthal vorticity   of the base flow. The perturbation vorticity is superposed on this. As a perturbation passes through this region, the fluid is compressed in the axial direction and stretched  in the radial and azimuthal directions. By conservation of angular momentum, the vorticity in the radial and azimuthal directions increases, while the vorticity in the axial direction decreases. This increases the amplitude of the perturbation vorticity. The amplified perturbation then passes through the ＆KH＊ region, where it is amplified by the classic Kelvin每Helmholtz mechanism. This description agrees with observations from experiments on vortex breakdown in swirling jets by Oberleithner et al. (2011). These researchers found the wavemaker to be upstream of the breakdown bubble and  the surrounding flow field to behave as an amplifier of upstream disturbances.In summary, the nine components of the structural sensitivity reveal that, at the point of instability, two mechanisms are active in the wavemaker region of the global mode. The first is due to conservation of angular momentum in regions of strong strain in the flow, particularly upstream of the breakdown bubble. This mechanism is most sensitive to feedback involving the radial and azimuthal components of the perturbation momentum. The second is a classic KH mechanism in regions of strong shear. This mechanism is most sensitive to feedback involving the axial component of  the perturbation momentum. We find that the first mechanism has more influence than the second on the growth rate and frequency of spiral vortex breakdown.4.3. We now consider the reference case of Sw 1.0 in light of the sensitivity analysis at  Sw  0.915. The main purpose of this section is to compare our linear global analysis  with the nonlinear local analysis of Gallaire et al. (2006) and the weakly nonlinear global analysis of Meliga et al. (2012). Figure 9 presents the results of the stability analysis for Sw 1.0 in the same format as figure 3. The global mode shapes and spatial wavelengths agree very well with the DNS results in the linear regime shown in figure 29 of Ruith et al. (2003).In agreement with Gallaire et al. (2006), figure 9(b) shows that the flow at Sw 1.0has two finite regions of absolute instability: a small region corresponding to the recirculation bubble and a large region corresponding to the wake. This is shown in more detail in figure 10, where our results are compared with results from figure 5 of Gallaire et al. (2006). Our results were obtained by locating saddle points of 肋 in the complex-k-plane. Gallaire et al.＊s results were obtained by extracting 肋0i from linear DNS of locally-parallel flows created from the actual flow at 15 streamwise(locations. The results are in very good agreement with each other, even capturing saddle switching around x 1.The structural sensitivity map in figure 9(g) shows that there is a region of high sensitivity around the upstream end of the bubble, and regions of lower sensitivity downstream in the wake. In order to understand how each of these regions affects the global mode, we consider the components of the sensitivity tensor.The real and imaginary parts (which are not shown here) are similar to figures 4 and 5 for Sw  0.915 but show that the sensitive regions are not localized to just the  bubble or just the wake in any component of the sensitivity tensor. This is evident in figure 11, which shows the absolute value of the sensitivity tensor at every point in the domain. In every plot, the regions around the bubble have greater sensitivity than the regions in the wake. Although both the bubble and the wake affect the instability, we deduce that the bubble is more influential than the wake in affecting both the growth rate and the frequency of the linear global mode. In contrast to the linear results, Gallaire et al. (2006) concluded that the nonlinear global behaviour is governed by the wake and not by the bubble. They extracted the spatial growth rate of perturbation kinetic energy from Ruith et al＊s saturated nonlinear DNS. They compared this with the spatial growth rates at the two pointswhere the flow transitions from convective to absolute instability, in accordance with the nonlinear mode selection criterion of Pier et al. (2001). The spatial growth rate at the leading edge of the wake region matches that of the saddle point of the local analysis there. Our local analysis gives the same result as that of Gallaire et al. (2006). In summary, as the results in table 2 show, the frequency predicted by the nonlinear local analysis in the wake is very close to the limit-cycle frequency measured in Ruith et al. (2003)＊s DNS. The frequency predicted by our linear global analysis is also close to this limit-cycle frequency. However, our sensitivity analysis finds that the bubble is more influential than the wake in determining this frequency. We have not yet been able to find a convincing explanation for this behaviour. One possibility  is to consider the nonlinear modification of the base flow due to the direct global mode. This would be largest in the wake, close to where the direct global mode reaches a maximum. In our flow, the linear wavemaker region is quite far upstream of  this location. For small steps beyond the bifurcation point (at Sw 0.915), we would expect the flow to be significantly modified in the wake (Chomaz 2005), which Meliga  et al. (2012) found to be the case.5. Concluding remarksIn this paper, we have studied the linear global stability of the steady axisymmetric vortex breakdown bubble observed in the simulations of Ruith et al. (2003). We have confirmed that spiral vortex breakdown is caused by an unstable eigenmode of azimuthal wavenumber m 1. The adjoint of this direct global mode has also been calculated. By overlapping the direct and the adjoint global modes, we have found the location of the wavemaker, which can be interpreted as the region responsible for causing spiral vortex breakdown (Giannetti & Luchini 2007). By considering the nine components of the structural sensitivity tensor, we have identified the physical mechanisms that are responsible for causing spiral vortex breakdown. We have also used a local stability analysis to work out the regions of absolute instability in the flow.When the m  1 mode first goes unstable, at Sw  0.915, the wavemaker is  located just upstream of the breakdown bubble, which is the only region of the flow  that is absolutely unstable.  The structural sensitivity tensor reveals that this mode  is caused by two physical mechanisms. The first mechanism is most sensitive to feedback between the radial and azimuthal components of the perturbation momentum, corresponding to the region of strong strain just upstream of the breakdown bubble. We interpret this mechanism to be related to conservation of angular momentum. The second is the classic Kelvin每Helmholtz mechanism, which is most sensitive to feedback involving the axial component of the perturbation momentum. This corresponds to the regions of strong shear around the bubble.We have also considered the case of Sw 1.0, which has two regions of absolute instability, one in the bubble and one in the wake. Our linear analysis has found that the region around the bubble is more influential than the wake in determining the growth rate and frequency. Previously, Gallaire et al. (2006) had found that the nonlinear frequency for this case is determined by the wake and our local analysis agrees with theirs. The frequencies from our analysis and Gallaire＊s analysis are both close to the limit-cycle frequency observed in Ruith et al. (2003)＊s three-dimensional DNS.The sensitivity study of this paper provides useful information about the inherent dynamics of the flow. Knowing which regions are responsible for causing spiral vortex breakdown in swirling flows is the first step towards developing control strategies in such flows. From an engineering point of view, the approach used here can be extended, following Marquet, Sipp & Jacquin (2008) and Meliga, Sipp & Chomaz (2010), to work out the sensitivity of the eigenvalue to a steady force acting on the swirling base flow. This will be more representative of the effect that a control device  will have on the growth rate and frequency of the unstable mode and will be the subject of another paper. AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank C. Heaton and G. Chandler for help with the numerical implementation, and the anonymous referees for their feedback. is grateful to Trinity College, Cambridge for financial support. The numerical computations were performed using the Darwin Supercomputer of the University of Cambridge High Performance Computing Service (http://www.hpc.cam.ac.uk/), provided by Dell Inc. using Strategic Research Infrastructure Funding from the Higher Education Funding Council for England.




