The ash  deposition mechanism in boilers burning Zhundong coal with high contents of sodium and calcium: A study from ash  evaporating t℃ondensing

Xuebin Wang a, *, Zhaoxia Xu b, Bo Wei  a, Lan Zhang c, Houzhang  Tan a, *, Tao Yang a, Hrvoje Mikulˇci´c d, Neven Dui´c d
a b s t r a c t  

The  high contents of sodium and calcium in Zhundong coal  induce severe slagging and ash deposition in boilers. In this study, the ash deposition mechanism was investigated based on  the results obtained from a full-scale boiler (350 MW) burning Zhundong coal,  and a ﬁxed bed reactor used for  ash evaporating- condensing. In  the full-scale boiler,  the condensing and depositing of  sodium and calcium sulfates play an  important role on  ash depositing on  convection heating surfaces. Sulfates start to signiﬁcantly condense and deposit at the ﬂue gas  temperature of about 850 ℃ on the medium and high temperature reheater surfaces. Ash  evaporating tests proved that, with the increasing in  temperature from 400 ℃ to 1200 ℃, the ash evaporating process is  divided into three stages: 1)  400e800 ℃, 80% of  sodium,  and100%  of  chlorine are released; 2)  800e1000 ℃, all  the left sodium evaporates and sulfur starts to be released with the formation of partial aluminosilicates; 3)  1000e1200 ℃, all  the left sulfur is released through the decomposition of calcium sulfates and then calcium starts to evaporate, while silicon oxides disappear due to the formation of new complex silicates. Ash  condensing tests further proved that, the sodium in Zhundong coal  was released mainly in the forms of atom, oxide, and chloride, in which sodium chloride account for  about 50%.  When the evaporating temperature  increased higher than 1000 ℃, partial alkali and alkaline earth metals were released as  gaseous sulfates, and afterward condense and deposit on the heating surfaces. At last, a temperature-dependent  ash deposition mechanism in  Zhun- dong coal  combustion was proposed.
1.  Introduction
Zhundong, located in the east of Junggar Basin,  Xinjiang, China, with the forecast reserves of 390  billion tons is the largest intact coalﬁeld in the world. According to the current coal consumption in China, the Zhundong coal could meet the needs for coal consumption in China for the next 100  years [1,2]. Zhundong coal is characterized by high ignition quality and low environmental threat due to the high volatile content  and ultralow ash   and sulfur contents.  However, similar with the brown coal in Australia [3e6], the content of sodium in Zhundong coal ash  is very high, generally more than 5%, far more than the normal sodium content level in typical Chinese coal, usually between 1 and 2% [7,8].  Consequently severe problems of slagging, fouling, and corrosion on boiler heating surfaces are induced, which deteriorate the heat ﬂux, efﬁciency, and lifetime of a boiler [9]. Xi'an Thermal Power Research  Institute  (TPRI) investigated the slagging and fouling status quo  of dozens of boilers burning Zhundong coal in Xinjiang, China.  It indicated that boilers would be under great threat from slagging when the sodium content in coal ash exceeded 2.5 and
3% for 100  MW  and 225e350 MW  boilers, respectively. The  boiler adaptability of even larger capacity 600e1000 MW on high sodium coal is still unknown [7].
In this study eight kinds of Zhundong coal were compared with twenty-seven kinds of non-Zhundong coal very commonly used in China,  including bituminous, sub-bituminous, and lignite coal. The inverse values of  sodium, calcium and sulfur content  in  ash  are plotted in Fig. 1, showing that Zhudnong coal  is astricted to a very limited region. It can  also  be observed that the calcium and sulfur contents in Zhundong coal ash  were much higher than the average contents in  non-Zhundong coal  ash.  The  contents of calcium and sulfur in  certain types of Zhundong coal  ash  are  higher than 30%, and in some cases even 40%. Harbin Boiler Company has  conducted a test in a 300 MW boiler co-ﬁring Zhundong coal, and after a dozen days operation, the convection heating surfaces were blocked by severe slagging and ash  deposition. In this test, a high amount of calcium sulfates was found in  the slags  and deposits [10].  These observations indicated that beside sodium, calcium and sulfur species also  play  an  important role  in the slagging and ash  depositing process.
Recently,  only   a  few  studies investigated the Zhundong coal slagging. He et al. [11] used Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) to measure atomic sodium emissions in  Zhundong coal combustion under low  O2  concentration (3.9e10.6%,  oxygen-fuel combustion).  The   study  showed  that  very  little  sodium  was released from the Zhundong coal's volatile matters. 20e38% of sodium was released from the char content while 60e78%  of sodium was released from the ash  content. The  study also  showed that the ratio of  potassium released from the char content was enhanced by  O2  but   inhibited by  CO2  concentration. Zhou  et al. [12,13] developed  an  ash  deposition probe with charge-coupled device camera and heat ﬂux monitoring system to  on-line record the deposition thickness and heat ﬂux in a 300  KW test furnace. It was found that the deposit growth process was composed of four stages and the slagging deposits showed layer structures. However, the enrichment of alkali and alkali-earth metal was not found in each deposition layer.  Xu  et al.  [1]  compared the ash  properties from Zhundong coal co-ﬁring in a lab-scale drop tube furnace and a power plant boiler,  which agreed well.   The  study showed that particles smaller than 10  mm  had higher Ca, Fe, and Mg  content, while the weight fractions of sodium and potassium were not that high. In another study on Zhundong coal slagging, the ash  deposits were collected from different positions in  a  30  MW  subcritical boiler.  The  chemical analysis showed that the ash  fouling on  the superheater tubes was formed with a thinner Fe-rich layer followed by  the deposition of  Na2SO4  liquids.  The  slagging in  the water
cooled wall  was mainly induced by the low-temperature eutectics
from the interaction of CaO and Fe2O3  on the receding char surface, and the eutectic CaeAleSi containing Fe2þ-bearing oxide [9]. The other studies on  Zhundong coal  slagging were mainly focused on the ash  fusion and melting by  using lab-scale furnaces and ash melting  apparatus.  Meng [14]   found that  the low-temperature eutectics of ferrum and aluminosilicate played an  important role in  the high-temperature sintering of  Zhundong coal  ash  and its slagging near the water cooled wall.  It  was also  found that this phenomenon is comparatively affected by O2 concentration. Wang et al. [15]  following the State Standard of GB/T 212-2008 and GB/T
219-1996, measured the ash  melting temperature for  different Zhundong coal  co-ﬁring tests. The  study showed that there was a worst co-ﬁring ratio for the lowest melting temperature. However, the most recent work [16]  pointed out  that the two named stan- dards were not suitable for  the evaluation of Zhundong coal  ash melting, since the  softening temperature  decreased by  100   ℃, when the ashing temperature was lowered from 815  to 500  ℃.
Summarizing the previous results, the authors note that the slagging problem in Zhundong coal  combustion is mainly ascribed to two reasons: (1)  the formation of  low-temperature eutectics containing ferrum at high furnace temperatures in the water cooled wall  region, and (2) re-condensing of evaporated alkali and alkaline earth metals (AAEMs) at lowered gas  temperatures in the convection heating surface region. The  melting or  fusion of eutectics containing ferrum has   been widely reported, regardless of  coal types, and it mainly depends upon the primary components in coal ash  like  silicon, aluminum, and calcium. However, the trans- formation of AAEMs is more associated t℃oal types, for Zhundong coal  as newly found low-rank lignite with extremely high sodium and calcium content, the understanding of AAEMs transformation and ash  deposition is still  insufﬁcient. Therefore, this study aims to investigate ash  deposition mechanism in  the convection heating surface region of  boilers burning Zhundong coal, via incorporating the tests in a full-scale boiler and in a lab-scale ﬁxed bed reactor. In the full-scale 350 MW boiler, the slags and deposits were collected and analyzed at different convection heating surfaces along the gas  ﬂow direction. Moreover,  a special temperature-controlled condensing probe, above the fuel stack, was designed to capture the released AAEMs vapor in a ﬁxed bed  reactor. The  residual solid   ash  and the captured condensed species were analyzed by using X-ray ﬂuorescence (XRF), X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM),  and energy dispersive spec- trometer (EDS). The  research goal  is to build a full  transformation mechanism of sodium and calcium from the Zhundong coal, through evaporating and condensing, to deposits in boilers.

2.  Experimental section

2.1.  Fuel properties

Since  there is no  boiler that could completely be  operated on Zhundong coal,  in  the full-scale test Zhundong (ZD) coal  was co- ﬁred with Zhunnan (ZN) coal,  while in lab-scale test only  ZD coal was used. The  fuel  properties of ZD and ZN coal  are  compared in Table  1. The  water content in  ZD coal  is twice of that in  ZN coal, while the ash  content in ZD coal  is lower than in the ZN coal. Note that the ash  fusion temperatures (DT, ST, and HT) of ZD coal  are
higher than that of ZN coal by 120  ℃, even if the slagging of ZD coal
is much more severe. The  contents of calcium and sodium in  ZD coal  ash  are  over 40% and 6%, respectively. These two contents are much higher in ZD coal  than that in ZN coal,  however the ferrum content in ZD and ZN coal  ash  is almost the same. The comparison of fuel  properties indicates that the key  factors inducing slagging should be  high sodium and calcium contents, rather than melting and ferrum content.

2.2.  Slag and  deposit sampling in a full-scale boiler

Slags  and deposits were sampled in a 350  MW  tangential-ﬁred boiler (Model, DG1211/17.4-II22) after  continuous  operating  for six months. As shown in the Fig. 2, ﬁve layers of burners (a, b, c, d, and e) were running, in which three layers (b, c, and e) were used for ZD coal  combustion and the other two layers (a, d) were for ZN coal. Because the coal feeding quantity in each layer is the same, the co-ﬁring ratio of ZD coal  is about 60%, and the remaining 40% if of ZN coal. The sampling positions are  also  marked in the Fig. 2. They are  located on  each convection heating surface along the gas  ﬂow direction: wall  reheater (A-WR),  separation platen superheater (B- DPS), platen superheater (C-PS), medium and high temperature reheater (D-MHR),  high temperature superheater (E-HS),  low temperature superheater (F-LS), economizer (G-Eco),  air preheater (H-Pre).

2.3.  Evaporating and  condensing of ash  species

The  evaporating and re-condensing test was operated in  the schematic experimental system in Fig. 3, mainly including evaporating unit and condensation sampling unit. The  crucible contain- ing samples was heated in a tube furnace for ash  evaporating. An S- type thermocouple was inserted from furnace bottom to  measure the evaporating temperature. The  temperature-controlled condensation sampling unit was 5 cm  above the crucible, in order to capture the evaporated metal species for 1 h. The sampling unit was cooled by  air  and the sampling substrate at  the bottom was dismountable for  further analysis. A K-type thermocouple was welded on  the substrate inner surface to  measure the condensing  surface temperature,  which  was  controlled  at   500   ± 5  ℃  by adjusting air  speed. This condensing temperature range was used, since in the previous work by Schoﬁeld [17] it was reported that the deposition rate of sodium salts was almost unchanged with probe temperature  changing, when  the  probe  temperature  is  below 550  ℃
The fuel  sample was heated from ambient temperature to three
targeted temperatures: 500, 800, and 1000 ℃ at a constant heating rate of 5 ℃/min. The  entire evaporating process was divided into three stages and the condensed metal vapor species were continuously sampled at each stage by changing a new substrate.
The evaporation and condensation sampling were continuous in this apparatus, thus it  was impossible to  obtain the residual ash sample in  the crucible for  analysis. Therefore, the ash  was again prepared in an  atmosphere-controlled mufﬂe furnace (KSL-1700X, made by Hefei  Ke Jing Materials Technology Co., Ltd., China) by the heating curve shown in Fig. 3, at 400, 600, 800, 1000, 1100, 1150 and 1250 ℃ under air atmosphere. The total ﬂow rate passing through
the furnace and samples was controlled at 500  ml/min (O2, 100  ml/ min; N2, 400  ml/min). In this paper, only  the data at 400e1100 ℃ were presented, because at the high temperature of 1150e1250 ℃,the ash  samples melted and were tightly adhered on  the crucible surfaces, and it was impossible to carry out  the analysis.

2.4.  Characterization of slag  and  deposit samples

X-ray  ﬂuorescence (XRF, S4 PIONEER, Germany) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, X'pert MPD  Pro,  PANalytical, Netherlands)  were used to  analyze the element distribution and the chemical com- ponents of the deposits from full-scale furnace, and of the residual ash  from the mufﬂe furnace. The  micro-morphology and the element distribution in  the condensed deposits on  sampling sub-strate surfaces were analyzed by  using scanning electron micro- scopyeenergy  dispersive  spectrometry   (SEMeEDS,   JEOL  JSM-6390A,  Japan).

3.  Results  and discussion

3.1.  Morphology and  chemical components of deposit samples in a full-scale boiler

The  ﬂue gas,  steam, air,  and wall  temperature at  each heating surface were  collected from power plant  control system, and plotted in Fig. 4(a).  In this power plant burning Zhundong coal, the wall-temperature was mainly monitored at  the heating surface of super heaters and reheaters. At each stage of heating surfaces, there were  twelve  temperature  monitors, and  the  wall-temperature value in Fig. 4 was obtained after averaging. The water-steam and ﬂue gas  temperatures were obtained by directly reading from the monitor system of the power plant.
The  morphologies of slags  and ash  deposits along gas  ﬂow direction are  shown in Fig. 4(b).  It can  be seen that all the slags  and deposits from A-WR  to E-HS have a dark-red color,  which can  be associated to the presence of the ferrous oxides. In the region of high ﬂue gas temperatures (A-WR and B-DPS, Tﬂue gas > 872 ℃), there are a certain amount of dark porous slags.  In medium gas temperature regions (C-PS, D-MHR, and E-HS, 872  ℃ > Tﬂue  gas>630 ℃), there were no dark porous slags and these compacted deposits looked like blocky red  soil.  At last  three heating surfaces (F-LS, G-Eco, and H- Pre,  630  ℃ > Tﬂue  gas  > 141  ℃), no  blocky deposit was found, and there was mainly the loose ash stacking on horizontal tube surfaces. The samples in Fig. 4 can be divided into three groups: dark porous slags,  compacted dark-red blocks, and loose ash  stackings.
The  elemental  compositions  for   all   the  deposit  samples collected on  each surfaces are   displayed as  stacked columns in Fig. 5(a). It can be seen that the top  three elements in most deposits are  silicon, calcium, and sulfur, corresponding to the co-ﬁring ratio, ash  and inorganic elemental content in raw fuels.  The ash  content in ZN coal is more than twice of that in ZD coal, and silicon content in ZN coal ash  is almost 45% while that in ZD coal is below 18%. The calcium content ranks the ﬁrst (~40%) and third (~13%) in ZD and ZN  coal  ash,   respectively.  The  sulfur contents in  these deposits range from 11% to 24%, much higher than the ash  sulfur contents in Table  1. This indicates that sulfur oxides released from volatile and char react with inorganic ash species, and form sulfates that deposit on  the ash  or heating surfaces. The  sodium content is comparably low  and stable ranging from 3 to 5%.
In Fig. 5(a),  it can  also  be observed that in the region of D-MHR and  E-HS,  the  contents of  calcium and  sulfur were  suddenly enlarged while the contents of silicon and aluminum were lowered.
This  indicates that  calcium and sulfur species have higher concentrations in these two regions. To show it more clearly, the mass ratios of  S/(Si  þ Al), Ca/(Si  þ Al), and Na/(Si  þ Al) are  shown in Fig. 5(b).  In Fig. 5(b),  the signiﬁcant increase of sulfur, calcium, and sodium content in D-MHR and E-HS regions can be observed. These three element contents in E-HS region are  2.5 times than that in A- WR, B-DPS, F-LS, G-Eco, and H-Pre regions.
Comparing the  ﬂue  gas   temperature  in   Fig.  4(a)   with the elemental composition in Fig. 5(b), it can be seen that from A-WR t℃-PS, the ﬂue gas  temperature decreases from 1316 to 872  ℃, and there is no  apparent increase of sodium, calcium, and sulfur con- tent. However, from C-PS to D-MHR, with the ﬂue gas temperature further decreases from 872  to 772  ℃, a sharp increase in sodium, calcium, and sulfur content can be observed. This proves that in the temperature range of 872e772 ℃, amount of gaseous sodium and calcium sulfates condense into sulfate aerosols and then deposit on ash  particle and heating surfaces. The  condensing and depositing quantity of sulfates reaches the highest value at  695  ℃, in  E-HS region. Most sulfates condense and deposit in  D-MHR  and  E-HS region (872e630 ℃), since at the last  three heating surfaces (F-LS, G-Eco,  and H-Pre, 630  ℃ > Tﬂue  gas  > 141  ℃), sulfate content in deposits and ash  is almost constant.
The  observed phenomenon is  very similar with our  previous studies related to  the ash  deposition in  a full-scale grate furnace burning biomass with high potassium content [18].  In biomass furnaces, the gaseous sodium sulfates in  ﬂue gas  also  started its condensing and depositing on  medium  heating  surfaces below
900  ℃ [19].  This indicated that, when combusting fuels  with high
contents of AAEMs, there is a critical temperature around 850  ℃, at which most of the AAEMs sulfates start to condense, form aerosols, and to deposit.
XRD analysis was conducted to qualitatively identify the major and minor mineral components in  slags  and deposits shown in Table  2. In this table the pane color depth stands for mineral con- tent level.  The eight samples were divided into two groups: in the ﬁrst group (AeE) CaSO4 ranked the ﬁrst, while in the second group (FeH) SiO2  ranked the ﬁrst. This  is  corresponding to  the macro morphology and elemental composition results. The  samples in ﬁrst group are  mainly porous slags  and blocky deposits, due to the melting at high temperatures and condensing at medium temperatures. In  the second group, since already most of  sulfates have condensed and deposited in previous regions, CaSO4 content in this group of deposits decreases, SiO2  and Al6Si2O13 contents increase. Therefore these samples look  like  loose ash  containing more aluminosilicates. Moreover, the authors tried to ﬁnd sodium sulfates in the samples, however,  no  Na2SO4 was  found, only   some minor minerals like  NaAlSiO4,  (Na,Ca)(Si,Al)4O8, and  Na2S.  The  named minerals were also  mainly detected in the regions of C-PS, D-MHR,and E-HS, at  medium gas  temperatures. The  possible patterns  of sodium  sulfates might  be   covered  by  that of  calcium sulfates, because the calcium content was 40.69%  that was almost seven times of sodium content 6.07% as shown in Table  1.


3.2.  Chemical component of coal  ash  at  different evaporating temperatures

The  full-scale co-ﬁring test gives  the chemical components of slags   and deposits on  heating surfaces in  boilers, which clearly showed the  enrichment and depositing of  calcium sulfates on heating surfaces. However, due to the co-ﬁring of ZD and ZN coal, and relative lower content of sodium, 1/8  of calcium content, the enrichment of  sodium species in  deposits was not observed. To further demonstrate the evolution of  sodium from the raw Zhungdong coal  to  deposits, the experiments of  ash  evaporating and re-condensing were conducted.
Zhundong coal  ash  was mainly prepared in a mufﬂe furnace at
temperatures ranging from 400 to 1400 ℃ in air atmosphere. At the temperatures  of1200 ℃ and 1400 ℃, the ash   samples melted, ﬂowed, adhered to  the alundum plate, and were impossible to  be analyzed. The SEM micro morphologies of ash prepared at 600, 815,1000,  and 1100 ℃ are shown in  Fig.  6.  With the temperature
increasing from 600  to 1000 ℃, the ash  particles size  decreased with no  conspicuous sintering. However,  when the temperature was continually increased to 1100 ℃, signiﬁcant sintering occurred, ash  particles melted,  and aggregated into large porous pieces. In this study,  the heating time in  mufﬂe furnace is 1 h  at  targeting temperatures, while the practical residence time of coal  and ash particles in boilers is only  3e6 s, which seems incomparable. However,  those ash  particles depositing and adhering on  heating surfaces indeed undergo a much longer period. With the increasing in  deposits thickness on  heating surfaces, the heating transfer ef- ﬁciency is signiﬁcantly reduced, and the wall  or  deposits temperature can  increase from 500  to 1200 ℃ [13].  At such a high local wall  temperature (>1100 ℃), ash  particles on  wall  surfaces melt, aggregated, and tightly adhered on  unclean heating surfaces.
The  elemental composition of ash  at  different temperatures  is shown in Fig. 7(a).  With the increasing in ashing temperature, sodium and potassium contents  decrease, and at  temperature  of 1000℃, there is almost no  alkali metal. In  contrast, for  the elements like  silicon and aluminum, their contents in  ash  increase with temperature increasing. The change of oxygen content is also draws attention. Due  to  its  decreasing with temperature, this phenomenon indicates partial minerals release as oxides. More- over,  what should be  noted is  that sulfur content decreases at 1000 ℃ and becomes zero at 1100 ℃.
Multiplying the elemental content (%) with ashing ratio (%), and raw sample mass (g),  to  reveal the elemental evaporating more clearly, the absolute residual mass of key elements per  gram ZD coal can  be calculated. These values are  plotted in Fig. 7(b).  The right Y axis  scale  of calcium and sulfur is 10  times of that of sodium and chlorine  to  keep  them  in   one    ﬁgure  comparably.   With the increasing in ashing temperature from 400  to 1200 ℃, the evaporating process can  be  divided into three stages identiﬁed by  the curves of ashing ratio and residual element mass. During the ﬁrst stage, from 400 to 815 ℃, 80% of sodium, and 100% of chlorine were released. During the second stage, from 800  to 1000 ℃, all the left sodium evaporated and sulfur started to  be  released. During the third stage, from 1000 to 1100 ℃, all the left sulfur was released and calcium started its evaporating.
The release of chlorine in Zhundong coal  was very similar with our  previous investigation for  biomass fuel,  in  which all  chlorine was also  released at around 800  ℃ [20].  A previous XAFS study showed that all the chlorine in  brown coal  was likely  to  be  associated with sodium [3].  Here it can  be  noted that in  Fig. 7(b)  the released mass quantity of chlorine was much less  than that of so- dium, which indicated that only  partial sodium was released as
chloride and the other might be  released as  atom, oxide, and hydroxide. The calcium in coal  ash  was very stable and released only when the temperature was higher than 1100 ℃. Most of alkaline earth metals (Ca and Mg) existed as ion-exchangeable carboxylates in raw coal,  which decomposed and produced oxides at  low  temperatures   (<900  ℃)   [21].    However,   when  the  temperature increased, partial calcium oxide evaporated, reacting with silicon and aluminum oxides.
XRD patterns were measured to  further illustrate the trans- formation of minerals, and are  shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 8 shows that in the original ash  at  400  ℃, the major minerals include anhydrite (CaSO4),  quartz (SiO2)  and calcium carbonate (CaCO3) with a very strong signal peak, respectively.  There is  also  a  small amount  of gehlenite  (Ca2Al2SiO7) at this temperature. As the heating temperature increased to  600   ℃, the XRD peak intensity of  CaCO3 greatly decreased, referring to the decomposition of CaCO3:CaCO3 / CaO þ CO2(g) (R1) It was also  found that at 600  ℃, the XRD peak intensity of SiO2decreased but  that of Ca2Al2SiO7  increased, which indicated partial silicon oxides and aluminum oxides might react with calcium ox- ides  to generate gehlenite at a lower temperature through:2CaO þ SiO2  þ Al2O3  / Ca2Al2SiO7 (R2) When  the  heating  temperature  was  increased the  heatingtemperature to  815  ℃, it  was observed that CaCO3  disappeared,SiO2    content  further  decreased,  while  the  peak  intensity  of Ca2Al2SiO7   exceeded that of  SiO2.  This  even more afﬁrmed the possibilities of reactions (R1) and (R2) indicated  above. Besides of the reaction (R2) from CaO t℃a2Al2SiO7, CaSO4 was also  proposed
to react with SiO2 and Al2O3 to produce Ca2Al2SiO7  at around 800 ℃
[22].
When the ash  was prepared at 1100 ℃, the XRD patterns have been totally changed. In the temperature ranging from 400  ℃ to
815  ℃, CaSO4  and SiO2  were always the most abundant mineral species in  ash,   while at  the temperature of  1100 ℃ these two
mineral  species almost  totally  transferred  to   other  phases.  At
1100 ℃ the XRD peak intensity of  Ca2Al2SiO7    increased  again, proving that more gehlenites were formed at higher temperatures by reaction (R2). Moreover, it can  be noted that at the temperature of 1100 ℃ CaMgSi2O7 and CaSiO3 were formed, indicating that with the decomposing of CaSO4, CaO reacted with SiO2  to form wollastonite (CaSiO3).  Akermanites  (CaMgSi2O7) and  augites  (Ca(Mg,Fe) Si2O6) were also found with the participation of magnesium oxides and ferrum oxides. Our  previous results have proved that SiO2  is
highly efﬁcient to  promote the decomposition of  CaSO4.  Consequently, the evolution mechanism of Zhundong coal  ash  with high calcium and sulfur content at higher temperature than 1000 ℃ can be concluded as following:CaSO4  / 

3.3.  Micro-morphology and  elemental component of Re-condensing deposits after  evaporating

In the previous section, the residual ash  properties at  different evaporating temperatures have been declared clearly. However, the evolution of sodium was still not clearly demonstrated by XRD, due to its lower content, compared to other major mineral elements in ash.  In this study, a moderate quench method was used to  obtain
re-condensed sodium species at  the wall  temperature of 500  ℃.
Since  the distance from the evaporating unit to the quench probe bottom is short, the condensed and deposited species on the probe bottom are  capable to  represent the forms of  released inorganic elements from ZD coal  combustion.
The  micro-morphology of  re-condensed species from ZD coal combustion at  500  and 815  ℃ is shown in Fig. 9 (left).  When coal was burned at 500  ℃, there was no  remarkable crystal deposition on  the probe bottom, while at  815  ℃, cubic shaped crystal parti- cles  were observed.  The  element content of  deposits on  probe bottom was analyzed by using EDS for more than ten target points. It was found that there were mainly sodium and chlorine in  the deposits, besides of  the basic  elements of ferrum and chromium for  all  the tested points. The  atom mole contents of sodium and chlorine  in   crystals were  collected and  are   plotted  in   Fig.  9 (right). Fig. 9 (right) shows that most of points deviate from the line  of Na:Cl ¼ 1:1,  but  are  adjacent to  the line  of Na:Cl ¼ 2:1,  or are  in the area of Na:Cl > 2:1.  This indicated that only  50% or less of sodium was released in the form of NaCl, and the other sodium
might be  released in  the form of atoms. van  Eyk et al. [5]  investigated sodium release from Loy Yang  brown coal  by  using quantitative planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence measurement and equilibrium calculation. The study showed that besides of sodium chlorides, the  most likely   sodium compound in  ash   is  sodium oxide. This leaded to the release of atomic sodium from ash  at high temperatures. However, sodium was hardly to be released into the ﬂue gas  in  the form of Na2O  or NaOH,  because even if NaOH  was produced by  Na2O  and H2O  at high temperatures, it  would also equilibrate to produce atomic Na  [23].   The  results of  chemical equilibrium calculation for  sodium compounds by Takuwa and Naruse [24]  also  indicated that there was no  gaseous NaOH at  the temperature below 1100 ℃. However, another work on particulate matter emission from brown coal  combustion found NaCl mainly contributed to  the emission of particles with aerodynamic diameter less  than 0.1  mm  [25].  Li [3]  reviewed the existing forms of sodium in  Victorian brown  coal   with  high content of  AAEMs, which is very similar to Zhundong coal. In this brown coal, sodium species can  mainly be  found in  two forms: as  ion-exchangeable cations  associated  with  the  carboxyl  groups  forming  part  of organic coal  substance or as NaCl associated with the moisture in coal  [3,4,26]. Consequently, in this study, the cubic crystal of NaCl on  probe surfaces should be  from the NaCl  combined with the
moisture in Zhundong coal,  and the other atom sodium should be from the sodium associated with the carboyl groups in Zhundong coal.
After  the ash  was heated to  815  ℃, the third clean deposition probe, also  cooled and with the surface temperature of  500  ℃, was  inserted, and  the  heating temperature  was  increased to 1000 ℃ and kept constant for 1 h. The global micro structures and element contents in deposits are  shown in Fig. 10(a). It can  be seen that there was no  chlorine in the deposits, agreeing well with the results in Fig. 9(b),  since all the chlorine has  been released before the temperature of 815  ℃. As shown in  Fig. 10(a), sulfate species were  observed in   the  deposits at   evaporating  temperature   of1000  ℃.  Also   in   this  ﬁgure  a   small  amount  of   silicon and aluminum can  be  observed, indicating the depositing of  aluminosilicates. Furthermore, a selected measurement on  the element distribution of different kinds of deposits is shown in Fig. 10(b). At evaporating temperature  of  1000 ℃, the deposits on  the probe were mainly divided into two types: (1)  the sulfates of alkali and alkaline earth metals (SAAEMs) containing sulfur, sodium, potassium, and  calcium; (2)   the  aluminosilicates containing  silicon, aluminum,   sodium,   potassium,   calcium,  and   magnesium.   As shown in  Fig. 10(b), the ﬁrst type was gray  and noted as 026  and 028,  while the second type was light white and noted as 025  and 027.  Most of the light white particles were embedded into the gray layer at the bottom. This proved that in the ash  depositing process of  Zhundong coal   combustion, the  released or  formed gaseous sodium chlorides, sodium sulfates, calcium sulfates, and potassium sulfates  ﬁrstly  deposited  on   the  cooling surfaces, and  then partial aluminosilicates were captured and embedded into the ﬁrst layers.
3.4.  Temperature-dependent ash  deposition mechanism in
Zhundong coal  combustion

Based  on the results from the full-scale industry boiler and lab- scale  experiments, a temperature-dependent ash  deposition mechanism cor  the combustion of Zhundong coal,  with high sodium and calcium content,  in  pulverized coal  furnaces was pro- posed in Fig. 11. At a lower temperature of 800  ℃, more than 80% of the sodium in Zhundong coal was released into ﬂue gas in the form of atom sodium, sodium oxides, hydroxide, and chlorides; SO2 was mainly from the oxidation of organic sulfur and pyrites. With the temperature  increased to  1100 ℃, the  left sodium was mainly released in  non-chloride form, while all the left  sulfur in  calcium sulfates was released by the decomposition of calcium sulfates with the formation of  calcium oxides. Starting  from 1000 ℃, partial calcium has  been released as gaseous forms of calcium oxides and atom calcium. As the temperature increased, as high as the ﬂame temperature in pulverized coal furnace, all the sodium and most of the calcium should be  released as  gaseous species, which quickly reacted with sulfur oxides in the ﬂue gas, forming a large amount of gaseous calcium and sodium sulfates [27,28].  At  the temperature ranging from 1100 to 1450 ℃, Zhundong coal  ash  melts and was easy to be adhered on  cooling surfaces.
After the ﬂue gas passes through the convection heating surface, its  temperature is reduced. With the decreasing in  ﬂue gas  temperature, the aerosols of calcium and sodium sulfates started forming. When the  ﬂue  gas   temperature  decreased to   around
850  ℃, a large number of sulfate aerosols are  formed, which very
easily deposit on heating surfaces. These aerosols could also deposit on the surfaces of ﬂy ash,  aggravating the adhering of ash  particles on  heating surfaces. In the meantime, the gaseous sulfates around the cooling surfaces directly condense and deposit on the surfaces. The   depositing  of  sulfate aerosols and  condensed  sulfates on heating surfaces is especially important, since after the formation of such a layer, more and more ﬂy ash  particles were adhered and the depositing layer would grow up  quickly.

4.  Conclusions

In this work, the Ca/Na/S/Cl transformation and ash  deposition mechanism in  boilers burning Zhundong coal  with high calcium and sodium contents were investigated. The main conclusions are as following:
(1)  In  a full-scale boiler,  the condensing and depositing of sodium and calcium sulfates play  an  important role   on  the slagging and ash  depositing on  convection heating surfaces. Sulfates start to signiﬁcantly condense and deposit at the ﬂue gas  temperature of about 850  ℃ (at  medium and high temperature reheater).
(2)  With the increasing in temperature from 400  to 1200 ℃, the
ash  evaporating process is divided into three stages: a) from
400   to 800   ℃, 80%  of  sodium, and 100%  of  chlorine are released; b) from 800  to 1000 ℃, all the left  sodium evapo- rated and sulfur starts to  be  released with the formation of partial aluminosilicates; c) from 1000 to 1200 ℃, all the left sulfur is  released through  the  decomposition of  calcium sulfates and then calcium starts to  evaporate,  while silicon oxides disappears due to the  formation of  new complex silicates.
(3)  The  condensing quenching test further proved the detailed forms of  released sodium and calcium. The  sodium in Zhundong coal  was released mainly in  the forms of  atom, oxide, hydroxide, and chloride, in which sodium chloride accounts for less  than 50%. When the evaporating temperature increased higher than 1000 ℃, partial alkali and alkaline earth metals were released as  gaseous sulfates, and after- ward condense and deposit on  the heating surfaces.

