Spatially resolved mean and unsteady surface pressure in swept SBLI using PSP
Abstract 
Strong crossflow and swept separation are key aspects of the flow dynamics of 3-D shock wave/boundary layer interactions. This study explores the global surface pressure field beneath the canonical interaction produced by a sharp fin with deflection angle 15◦ with a turbulent incoming boundary in a Mach 2 freestream flow. This corresponds to an interaction of moderate strength, and the unsteady pressure distribution captures pressure fluctuations associated with separation shock motion upstream of the interaction. Details of the PSP calibration are also described where the calibration process combines both a priori (with separately painted test coupon) and in situ calibration (with pressure tap measurements during test). Flow features are identified directly from the quantitative pressure distribution and compared to qualitative surface oil flow visualizations. The technique facilitates measurement of the pressure distribution on surfaces that have been difficult or impossible to instrument, such as the face of the shock-generating fin. The unsteady paint response is captured simultaneously with unsteady pressure transducers on the surface underneath the interaction, and a frequency response function based on this comparison is presented. As the results discussed herein demonstrate, the use of PSP allows one to capture significantly more information about this complex, highly three-dimensional interaction with details that are not easily obtained using traditional sensors, while also providing a more informed global view of the interaction. The utility and limitations of the technique in application to supersonic wind tunnel experiments are discussed. 

1 Introduction 
Experiments to capture surface pressure fields in shock wave/boundary layer interactions are motivated by the ubiquity of the phenomenon in supersonic external aerodynamics and its direct application to the development of next-generation high-speed air transport systems (Urzay 2018). Strong shock wave interactions are accompanied by adverse pressure gradients that can separate the incoming boundary layer, producing highly unsteady pressure forces and heat flux that have been historically challenging to predict, even in relatively simple geometries (Dolling 2001). The complex 3-D flows in swept interactions are the focus of many computational studies, which require experimental validation through wind tunnel or flight testing (Panaras 1996; Gaitonde 2015). With recent advances in diagnostics, significantly more instantaneous measurements are becoming feasible while also producing new validation datasets including plenoptic (Jones et al. 2018) and tomographic PIV (Humble et al. 2009; Threadgill and Little 2018) for volumetric flowfield measurements. When coupled with surface pressure fields, these provide rich insight into flow physics. A relatively new technique for acquiring spatially resolved surface pressure fields is pressure-sensitive paint (PSP), which is an alternative to arrays of traditional pressure taps. PSP has demonstrated improved spatial resolution over individual pressure taps, but with additional expense, complexity of light and camera setups, and potentially greater error. It is not yet clear which experimental configurations and flow conditions benefit from the inherent trade-offs. Recent reviews (Gregory et al. 2008, 2014) track the maturation of PSP in wide-ranging experimental applications, which include impinging jets (Davis et al. 2015), transonic swept wings (Sugioka et al. 2018), and cavity resonance (Casper et al. 2018). Experimental configurations that use PSP to study supersonic flows include blunt fin-generated SBLI (Raju and Viswanath 2005), jets in crossflow (Crafton et al. 2015) , swept fins on a cone (Turbeville and Schneider 2018), swept impinging SBLI (Padmanabhan et al. 2019), and curved inlets (Funderburk and Narayanaswamy 2019). The development of reliable, short-response-time paints for capturing unsteady pressure fluctuations remains an active area of research and is becoming increasingly specialized for different flow regimes (Sugioka et al. 2018; Sugimoto et al. 2017). Unsteady tests offer additional challenges in illumination, since paint excitation for each frame decreases with higher camera frame rates. Because the paint emission decreases with higher static pressure, experiments with subatmospheric surface pressures result in increased signalto-noise ratios and can take advantage of shorter exposure times. Temperature sensitivity, which can be effectively mitigated in steady paint response using a dual-luminophore technique described in Sect. 2, remains a source of error in unsteady pressure measurements. The benefits afforded by the high surface resolution of this image-based measurement are balanced by relatively higher uncertainty due to influences of camera noise, temperature, light source nonuniformity, and paint degradation. Additionally, the associated costs of the camera, lights, and paints remain higher than a typical low-noise static pressure transducer system used for time-averaged measurements, and so the value of higher spatial resolution must be justified. Sharp fin interactions produce a number of complex flow features that are of particular interest to researchers seeking to better understand flows experienced by real vehicles (Alvi and Settles 1992; Dolling 2001). An oblique shock generated at the leading edge of the fin sweeps over incoming boundary layer, and sufficient pressure rise separates the boundary layer, shown in Fig. 1. Early models of this flowfield describe the helical separation vortex, deduced largely from surface oil flow visualizations (Korkegi 1975; Kubota and Stollery 1981). Detailed observations of the flowfield structure and recent quantitative studies of flow properties across a wide range of Mach numbers and fin angles have been completed (Alvi and Settles 1990; Kim et al. 1991; Lu and Settles 1990; Arora et al. 2018). The single sharp fin-generated swept interaction produces high unsteady pressure forces and heat fluxes in the mid- and high frequency (St> 0.05) related to shear layer dynamics (Garg and Settles 1996; Arora and Alvi 2016; Adler and Gaitonde 2017), but it is not clear whether models used to describe dynamics of two-dimensional interactions exhibiting “closed” separation are applicable to flows displaying “open” separation, such as the current interaction (Dolling 2001). The inherent three dimensionality of swept interactions makes well-resolved measurements that elucidate flow physics more expensive, requiring distributed measurements of surface pressure. The single sharp fin-generated swept SBLI is often simplified by assuming conical symmetry of flow features, which is observed some distance downstream of the fin leading edge (Lu and Settles 1990). The length required to attain conical symmetry, known as the inception length, has been shown to vary with incoming boundary layer properties and interaction strength. The PSP measurement resolution, which would be insufficient if traditional pressure taps were used, permits analysis of inceptive scales that are present within an interaction and hint at different physical mechanisms within the flowfield. The current effort details experiments in two supersonic testing facilities to evaluate steady and unsteady PSP response underneath a complex, 3-D flow. This paper strives to cover critical issues of calibration and application to supersonic experiments. A novel method of correcting the unsteady PSP response for temperature is also presented. 

2 Pressuresensitive paint (PSP) models 
The underlying processes for accurate pressure measurements using PSP are briefly described in the following section; a comprehensive history and theory are available in Liu and Sullivan (2005). The photophysical parameters that influence the measured radiative emission are limited to pressure and temperature, since nonuniformities in luminophore application and excitation light are corrected by calculating ratios of images at known pressure conditions. The chemical process is governed by oxygen quenching, whereby the intensity of light emanating from the paint under ultraviolet excitation is a strong function of the concentration of oxygen surrounding special luminophore molecules. By taking a ratio of images acquired at known pressure conditions and the unknown test conditions, nonuniformities in lighting and luminophore distribution are accounted for and the resulting ratio is modeled by the reduced Stern–Volmer equation (Liu and Sullivan 2005): where I represents the image intensity (of a single pixel), P is pressure of that point, and subscript ref signifies the intensity and pressure at the known reference condition. The coefficients A(T) and B(T) are found empirically, and several authors have found that quadratic fits requiring an additional coefficient are more appropriate (Sugioka et al. 2018; Schreivogel et al. 2012). The present experiments use an exponential fit for pressure calibration of the steady PSP and a quadratic calibration for unsteady PSP. The active molecule that is presently used in both time-averaged and unsteady PSP is a platinum porphyrin (PtTFPP), which is receptive to excitation near 395 nm and emits near 650 nm. The steady PSP, which is known as binary fluoride-isopropyl-butyl (FIB) PSP, contains PtTFPP and an additional luminophore suspended in the FIB binder. The second luminophore, which is relatively insensitive to pressure, is captured simultaneously to correct for the temperature dependence of PtTFPP; the emission is close to 550 nm and can be captured on separate channels (red and green) using a commercially available color CCD camera 

3 Experimental methodology Experiments were carried out in two intermittent supersonic blow-down wind tunnels with different test section dimensions and boundary layer properties. The application of PSP is used to better understand the properties of this flowfield and to discover scaling parameters due to the differences in model size and boundary layer thickness, among others. Specifications of the facilities, PSP technique, and data processing methods are described in the following sections. 
3.1 Experimental facilities The experiments are conducted at similar freestream conditions within two supersonic wind tunnels, but with different incoming boundary layer properties, test section dimensions, and model dimensions. Comparisons of test conditions between the two tunnels at Mach 2, including boundary layer properties, are summarized in Table 1. The compressible boundary layer profile of Sun and Childs (1973) is used to define the velocity profile in the wake region, which is matched to the Musker (1979) log layer and buffer layer velocity profile. The temperature profile for the turbulent boundary layer is obtained through the modified Crocco–Busemann relation described in White (2006). 
The test section of the pilot tunnel measures 101.6 mm wide, 76.2 mm tall, and 254 mm long (4′′ × 3′′ × 12′′). The shock-generating fin is placed at an angle of15◦ with respect to the freestream Mach 2 flow and is 37.5 mm (1.48 inches) tall and 76.2 mm (3 inches) long. The leading edge of the fin is machined to a sharpness of 7°. Total pressure is measured in the stagnation chamber using a Omega PX-305 pressure transducer. All tests were conducted at a stagnation pressure of 345 kPa, stagnation temperature of 289 K, and freestream velocity of 510 m/s. The boundary layer thickness at the leading edge of the fin that is estimated from PIV to be 3.5 ± 0.2 mm (Arora et al. 2015), and compressible shape factor is 2.99. The model is mounted on the test section ceiling so that cameras could be mounted underneath the test section, which reduces the effects of vibration on acquired images. Companion experiments are conducted in the Florida State University Polysonic Wind Tunnel (PSWT), also in a Mach 2 freestream flow and fin deflection angle of 15°, but with a larger model (101.6 mm (4 inches) tall and 127 mm (5 inches) in length) and fin leading edge angle of 25°. The test section has a square cross section measuring 304.8 mm on all four sides and measures 609.6 mm in length (12′′ × 12′′ × 24′′). The test model is mounted on the floor of the test section, and high-quality optical windows are installed in the ceiling and sidewalls for camera/light source access. Both pressure-sensitive paints were applied to the test article in the same manner, using a hobby-type airbrush for both basecoat and photo-active layers. Image registration, preprocessing, and the procedure for converting light intensity ratios to pressure values are performed identically between the two facilities. 
3.2 Surface oil flow visualization A common technique for characterizing flow topology is surface oil flow visualization. In current tests, equal parts light mineral oil and red fluorescent powder dye are thoroughly mixed and airbrushed onto the model to produce even coverage of small (< 0.3 mm diameter) droplets. This dye is illuminated with high-intensity LEDs with a wavelength of 400 nm (ISSI), and images are captured at 15 Hz using an AVT GigE monochrome camera with Nikon f/1.4 50 mm lens. A long-pass filter with a cutoff wavelength of 590 nm is used to isolate the painted droplets from the reflection of the LEDs, which enhances the contrast in the resulting images. Surface flow visualizations where the principal surface flow features have been marked are shown in Fig. 2 and demonstrate the flow similarity between interactions in the two facilities. Further details of the surface flow visualization technique can be found in similar studies (Baldwin et al. 2019; Arora et al. 2018). The images are normalized by respective incoming boundary layer thickness, which scales the surface flow fields by a factor of approximately four between the two experiments 
3.3 Steady PSP measurement To capture the mean pressure response with minimal temperature dependence, a binary FIB paint (ISSI product) is used (Peng et al. 2013). An RGB CCD camera (ISSI) with a Nikon f/1.2 50 mm lens records the emission of both platinum-porphyrin (temperature and pressure sensitive) and the reference (temperature sensitive only) luminophores, which are detected separately on the red and green channels of the RGB sensor, respectively. A 470 nm long-pass filter is used to filter the 400 nm excitation wavelength; the blue channel of the RGB images is not used. By ratioing each image’s red and green channels, the pressure field is corrected for temperature variation during the test. Pressure is calculated by taking the “ratio of ratios” with respect to a reference image acquired at known pressure conditions before starting the tests 
The final resolution of the images after splitting the red and green channels is 804 × 604 pixels, with a scale of approximately 26 pixels/mm. Images are acquired for the entire test run at 10 Hz, and the images corresponding to stable test conditions are averaged to produce a single intensity field. Typically 15 s of at-condition data are acquired, resulting in 150 images that are used for each average. In the pilot tunnel experiments, three static pressure ports located in the upstream flow region are used to validate the mean pressure in the freestream for each run. Limited comparison is available to the PSP response in the freestream; mean pressure has been extensively tested using arrays of static pressure transducers at the same test conditions, and the paint response validation is discussed in Sect. 4.1. The model temperature is monitored by two thermocouples and shows approximately 13◦C temperature change over the duration of the run and 3◦C change during the acquisition of the mean data (15 s). However, based on the quality of the fit to validation data from a previous test (Arora and Alvi 2016), no temperature corrections are introduced in the present analysis. The model plate used in the PSWT has 13 pressure taps within the interaction for in situ comparison with PSP. 
3.4 Unsteady PSP measurement A polymer-ceramic PSP with a highly porous base structure, which permits an oxygen diffusion time to the luminophore on the order of 100 μs, (Fang 2010) is applied to the plate surface. Three unsteady pressure transducers are each placed 44.5 mm from the fin leading edge at angles of 22°, 37°, and 57° from the incoming flow. The locations are identified from flow visualization as close to separation line, underneath vortical flow, and just upstream of reattachment, respectively. More details are provided in the subsequent discussion of unsteady pressure results in Sect. 4.3. 
A Phantom V2012 camera with a Nikon f/1.2 50mm and 12mm spacer is used with a 610 nm long-pass filter (Andover Optics) to isolate the PSP emission from reflected light from the excitation LEDs. The monochrome images are acquired at resolution of 768 × 480 pixels at 50,000 frames per second for 1 s. In order to correct for wind tunnel vibration, the wind-on images are registered to the initial reference image using a cross-correlation algorithm with accuracy up to 0.01 pixel shifts. The ratio of registered wind-on and reference images is then calculated, and masks are applied to remove pixels corresponding to the fin and unsteady pressure ports. In order to make post-processing less computationally intensive, the images are cropped and bicubic downsampling is applied to reduce the final size of each image to a resolution of 150 × 268 pixels and scale of 10.7 pixels/mm. 
3.5 Steady PSP calibration Prior to wind tunnel testing, pressure response and temperature response are independently calibrated using a small plate that is painted concurrently with the model plate to ensure applicability of the calibration. Pressure is adjusted in a sealed chamber with optical access for the RGB camera and LED illumination, while a Peltier heater affixed to the painted plate with embedded thermocouples permits temperature control of the plate. The calibration results, including a calibration fit provided by ISSI and the exponential fit derived from in situ calibration, reinforce the temperature insensitivity of the technique (Fig. 3). The paint was calibrated at pressures from 2 to 20 psia at 2 psi intervals and temperatures of 0, 10, 15, 20, and 25 °C. The chevrons are colored by temperature, with the darkest symbol at 0 °C and the lightest at 25 °C, and confirm the low temperature sensitivity of the dual luminophore steady PSP. 
3.6 Unsteady PSP calibration In order to convert variations in intensity to pressure fluctuations without applying a temperature correction, the steady pressure distribution obtained using the temperature-compensated PSP is used as the known pressure to fit the unsteady intensity data from fast-response PSP. This allows the recorded unsteady intensity data to be calibrated to an unsteady pressure field, as depicted in Fig. 4. First, the steady pressure distribution is mapped to the same image space as the unsteady intensity ratios. Next, the relationship of intensity ratio and pressure is obtained by plotting the intensity ratio on the abscissa and pressure on the ordinate axis, as in Fig. 5. A quadratic function is fit for all data within a specified region of the interaction using a leastsquares estimate. These values for averaged unsteady PSP are included in the comparison to pressure tap data in Fig. 6 and agree well with this validation data. Some discrepancy between the interaction and freestream flows is observed, but it is not yet clear whether this effect is due to the impact of temperature or results from low signal-to-noise ratio. The unsteady pressure is simultaneously measured using three Kulite XCQ-062-5D pressure transducers mounted in the model plate flush with the test surface. The locations were identified from flow visualization as close to separation line, underneath vortical flow, and just upstream of reattachment, described in Sect. 3.4. The sensors are recorded at 200 kHz using a PXI-4462 A-D converter with built-in antialiasing filter that provides an alias-free bandwidth of DC to 80 kHz. Pressure acquisition is triggered by the camera recording, which is manually triggered by the operator once stable test conditions are reached. The differential pressure line is attached to the tunnel floor static pressure located on the wind tunnel side wall. A tare of the Kulites is performed during the wind-off image acquisition for each test run. A sample of time history of pressure (low-pass filtered below 8 kHz) measured by each Kulite and small “patches” of adjacent PSP (Fig. 11) shows the strong correlation between the techniques. A frequency response function is then estimated from each pair of signals to characterize the paint’s response; further discussion is in Sect. 4.3 
4 Results and discussion 
4.1 Measurements in SBLI using steady PSP The mean pressure field of the pilot tunnel measured using steady PSP is shown in Fig. 6a. The mean pressure field demonstrates an initial pressure increase near upstream influence line (UI), a pressure plateau between the separation line (SL) and inviscid shock line (IS), and maximum pressure near the fin, close to the reattachment line (RL). Two circular arcs are included to show where previous experiments (Arora et al. 2018) measured static pressure with traditional transducers, at r∕훿 = 4.5 and r∕훿 = 14.3. One array is within the inception zone, while the other lies under conically developed flow. Due to localized disruptions in the paint surface near the fin beyond r∕훿 = 12, steady PSP data downstream of r∕훿 = 12 is not reliable due to possible flow disruptions present under the paint surface and this limit is used to compare to pressure tap data in the conically developed region of the flow. Uncertainty in the steady pressure distribution is estimated as two standard deviations (2휎) from the mean, which is calculated from 15 s (150 images at 10 Hz) of PSP acquisition. The conical coordinates are based on initial surface oil flow in Arora et al. (2018), which place the VCO nearly 15훿 from the fin leading edge. This estimate for the VCO obtained from surface oil flow visualization relies solely on the upstream influence and separation line, which appear to converge at a greater distance than flow features downstream of separated flow. This has been demonstrated in simulations of swept compression ramp and fin-generated SBLI and hints at a deviation from quasiconical similarity in low Mach number interactions (Adler and Gaitonde 2019). Since the fin pressure distribution is also captured, a full view of the interaction for the interaction measured in the pilot tunnel is available (Fig. 7). A high pressure feature appears on the fin surface, and though accompanying surface oil flow experiments were not performed on the fin surface, it is conjectured that this is the response to the formation of a second compression due to a bow-shock-like shock ahead of separation near the fin leading edge. This is explored in more detail in the discussion of the unsteady PSP fields. However, within the fully developed region, outside the inception zone and downstream of separation, the boundary layer influence is negligible and the agreement in the pressure distribution using PSP between the two facilities is remarkably good. The discrepancy between “inner” and “outer” scaling within the conically developed region in swept SBLIs has been noted recently in simulations (Adler and Gaitonde 2019) and is here discussed from experimental pressure fields. A global comparison between the pressure fields measured in the pilot tunnel and PSWT is shown in Fig. 9, with color contours extracted from the PSWT and dashed line contours from the pilot tunnel. In dimensional coordinates, it is obvious that the flowfields are quite similar near the inviscid shock (solid line). However, the upstream influence region (where surface pressure increases from freestream (P∕P∞ = 1) to P∕P∞ = 1.6) is much larger in the PSWT pressure field than in the pilot tunnel. Additionally, the region of peak pressure (above P∕P∞ = 2) near the fin interface does not appear until farther downstream than in the pilot tunnel, indicating that the downstream location of peak pressure scales with boundary layer thickness as well. The flowfield model described by Vanstone et al. (2018) for swept SBLI describes the outer scaling of the interaction, which is strongly influenced by the parameters of the incoming boundary. The highly swept separation, where the crossflow velocity component dominates, appears to collapse using different scaling parameters, termed the inner scaling. Based on studies of swept ramp and sharp fin SBLI (Settles and Bogdonoff 1982; Settles Gary and Lu 1985), a correlation for the interaction inception length can be expressed as the following function: The conclusion from these correlation studies at Mach 3 studies is that an average value of a = 1∕3 produces general convergence of the extent of upstream influence, with broad scatter for fins (swept and unswept) and semicones in freestream Mach numbers of 2.25–4 (Zheltovodov and Knight 2011). This indicates that when the normal Mach number, Mn, is identical as in the two cases studied here, the inception length and boundary layer effect can be scaled by the Reynolds number using the boundary layer thickness as the pertinent length scale with a common exponent. However, the present data scale with a different exponent on the Reynolds number, a = 0.7. This is applied in Fig. 10, which scales the pressure distribution from the two wind tunnels with very good agreement throughout the pressure field. The deviation in scaling parameter from the accepted ℜ1 훿∕3 for freestream Mach numbers above 2 is possibly due to local effects of a bow-shock-like structure formed at the leading edge of the interaction, which is absent (or greatly reduced in influence) at higher Mach numbers. This was observed in a study with freestream Mach number of 1.8 and fin angle of 15°, with upstream influence obtained from surface oil flow visualization and pressure shifting farther upstream than predicted by the correlation with a = 1∕3 (Mukund et al. 2003). The deviation from established scaling may be a persistent feature of interactions with very high sweep that are close to shock detachment, but it is not possible to generalize from the limited available data. 
4.3 Unsteady pressure The unsteady pressure field shows strong fluctuations throughout the interaction. Three unsteady pressure sensors are installed underneath the interaction in the following configuration: K1 is downstream of separation, K2 is near the inviscid shock trace (underneath the recirculating vortex), and K3 is located near the impinging jet upstream of reattachment. Figure 11 shows the time history of the pressure from Kulites compared to the time history from PSP by locating a region of approximately 25 pixels just upstream of the Kulite in order to avoid paint response contamination downstream of the sensor. Although care is exercised to ensure the transducers are flush with the surrounding painted surface, it is important to recognize potential localized thermal contamination and local flow perturbations if the transducer is not perfectly flush. The Kulite XCQ-062- 5psid transducers fitted with B-screens have been reported to exhibit a flat frequency response up to 16 kHz (limited by the acoustic resonance of the sensor packaging) (Hurst and Olsen 2014) and here provide a “true” pressure, or input, for the PSP frequency response function up to the filtered frequency of 8 kHz. As observed in the time histories in Fig. 11, the PSP signal appears to track the temporal undulations in pressure as measured by the Kulites. There is a, however, a notable difference in the amplitude. To examine this further, the frequency response function (gain and phase) between the Kulite and averaged paint response are plotted from 0 to 8 kHz in Fig. 12. The frequency threshold for unsteady PSP is selected based on comparisons of PSP response and unsteady pressure transducers installed in the plate at three points in the interaction region. Coherence indicates the degree to which the paint is responding linearly with the pressure fluctuations measured by the transducer—because the transducer and PSP “patch” are not exactly collocated in the highly turbulent flow, it is expected that coherence is less than 1. However, values above 0.5 provide confidence in the PSP technique up to the determined cutoff frequency. There is a marked difference in the Kulite/PSP comparison in the K3 position, especially in the low frequency (0–1 kHz) coherence, that does not match the comparison observed in other locations. It is not possible to ascertain whether this difference in the signals is due to discrepancies in the physical response of the paint. It is likely that since this region of the flowfield is near reattachment, dynamics are dominated by mid-frequency pressure fluctuations, and the response within this low-frequency range is too low in amplitude to be accurately captured by PSP (Adler and Gaitonde 2018). The following analyses all consider the PSP field, wherein the time history of each pixel has been low-pass-filtered to 8 kHz, which provides a resolvable St훿 = 0.055. Although this does not capture all of the important mid-frequency content relating to Kelvin–Helmholtz and shear layer dynamics (0.01 < St< 0.1) (Adler and Gaitonde 2018) or high-frequency unsteadiness originating in the incoming boundary layer (St훿 ≈ 1), the spatially resolved pressure fields permit new observations of global, low- and limited mid-frequency dynamics. The relative energy of pressure fluctuations is visualized by the root-mean-square pressure in Fig. 13, which is nondimensionalized by the freestream pressure (P∞) obtained from the steady pressure distribution. The footprint of the interaction is clearly visible by the sharp increase over the freestream pressure fluctuations at the upstream influence line. Peak rms levels are observed near the leading edge of the fin, both on the face of the fin and the plate surface. The amplitude of pressure fluctuations decreases as the interaction grows in size and reaches a steady value in the conically developed region of the flow. The first peak lies between the upstream influence and separation lines and is related to the separation shock foot motion. The strong unsteadiness upstream of the fin is similar to the unsteadiness in a 2-D separated SBLI. Several instantaneous snapshots of the 3-D pressure distribution on the fin and surface beneath the interaction are shown in Fig. 14. The selected sequence shows every 4th image, so that the time step between pressure fields is 80μs. Although the instantaneous images are shown at a time step smaller than the upper limit of the filtered frequency response to 8 kHz (훥tfilter = 125μs), motion of low-frequency structures is visible within the pressure field. A black contour line is added to P�∕P∞ = 0.01 to help identify highpressure structures present in the field. Colored arrows are added to identify features on the fin and plate surface and are discussed below. The sequence begins (Fig. 14a) with high pressure upstream of the fin leading edge observable on the plate surface (yellow arrow) and traces of high pressure on the fin surface (white arrow). This corresponds to the farthest upstream extent of the “quasi-2-D” SBLI present at the fin leading edge. Pressure near reattachment (magenta arrow) is positive in this frame, and although does not appear as a discrete moving pressure structure in the flowfield, it consistently correlates with high pressure immediately upstream of the fin leading edge. In the next frame (Fig. 14b), the high pressure near the fin leading edge (yellow arrow) appears to shift toward the interaction, and low-pressure zone at the fin leading edge grows. The high-pressure structure moves farther away from the fin leading edge in Fig. 14c on both the plate (yellow arrow) and fin surface (white arrow). The high-pressure structure tracked with the yellow arrow splits into two in Fig. 14d, where the downstream feature convecting away from the fin is marked by a gray arrow. Low pressure upstream of the fin leading edge is at a maximum from the observed frames, indicating downstream limit of the shock motion, nearly opposite to the region of high pressure marked by a yellow arrow in Fig. 14a. The next frame (Fig. 14e) shows a weakening of the high pressure on the fin (white arrow) and fast convection of flow from the swept interaction (gray arrow). The high-pressure structure marked with the yellow arrow remains relatively stagnant. Pressure near reattachment (magenta arrow) is low and reverses the pattern evident near reattachment observed in the first frame (Fig. 14a). The final frame (Fig. 14f) demonstrates pressure increasing on the plate upstream of the fin leading edge and weak pressure signature on the fin surface that is reminiscent of the first frame. The high-pressure structures that were upstream of the fin (yellow and gray arrows) convect quickly away once out of the vicinity of the fin leading edge. The presence of high-amplitude pressure structures near the fin leading edge is immediately obvious, and the pressure signature on the fin surface shows the presence of a curved structure with alternating high and low pressure, which is most evident in Fig. 14d. This is evidence of a sweeping shock produced by the separation upstream of the fin leading edge, similar to a bow shock. In addition to the oblique shock produced by the freestream flow deflecting in response to the fin, unsteadiness within the interaction is influenced by convecting flow features from the separation near the fin edge within the boundary layer. 
5 Conclusions Spatially resolved steady and unsteady surface pressure fields in swept SBLI are obtained using pressure-sensitive paint. The mean pressure distribution is obtained using an in situ pressure calibration and validated against pressure tap arrays within the interaction. In situ calibration can correct for changes in PSP luminophore response, which decay at different rates and affect the binary FIB calibration over successive wind tunnel runs. The key contribution of the current work is establishing a procedure for anchoring unsteady PSP results to static pressure distribution measured with temperature-corrected steady PSP. Once calibrated, the unsteady PSP is able to capture the unsteady pressure field up to at least 8 kHz (St훿 = 0.055). Future efforts to characterize the response can enable frequency-dependent calibration of the paint response and improved quantitative description of the pressure fields. Additionally, the PSP analysis can be further improved using modal analysis techniques in order to reduce noise (Sugioka et al. 2019) and isolate key physics within the unsteady data. The pressure fields between two facilities with fivefold difference in boundary layer height can be assimilated by scaling by 훿∕ℜa 훿, where a = 0.7 instead of the widely validated scaling of a = 1∕3. The scaling of upstream influence measured in the present experiments deviates from correlations developed for higher Mach numbers (M > 2.5), possibly due to the local effect of a bow-shock-like structure near the fin leading edge. Further investigation into the scaling for interactions with high sweep angle is necessary to determine the broader applicability of the present scaling law to low supersonic Mach numbers, since distinct physics in local recirculating flow near the shock generator is implicated 