Air-Blast Cross-Flow Atomization of Cold Fluids
Abstract 
The motivation for 
this work is to gain a better understanding of how particle characteristic can be controlled when metallurgi-cal slags are atomized in cross-flow air atomization. The effect of certain process parameters on the characteristics of liquid droplets produced by air-blast atomization has been investigated using water, castor oil, and glycerin. The gas-to-liquid ratio as well as the distance between the liquid and air stream were manipulated to understand their effect on the particle shape and size. The effect of liquid viscosity on the size and shape of droplets was also investigated. Droplets were observed in-flight with the use of shadow imaging, which were analyzed to provide information regarding the mentioned characteristics. It was found that a single correlation expressed as kinetic energy of the atomizing air per unit mass of the atomized liquid can explain the effects of gas/liquid ratio and distance between the air nozzle and crash point. The average particle size decreased with an increase in the gas-to-liquid flow rate ratio, increased with increasing distance between the liquid and air stream, and increased with increasing viscosity. The aspect ratio was consistent and close to unity for all water atomization experiments. 
Keywords Metallurgical slag.· Dry granulation.· Break-up mechanism.· Atomization 

Introduction 
Slag has traditionally been regarded as a waste byproduct from smelting operations and presents notable environmen-tal, operational, and financial significance for the metallur-gical industry. Typical slag generation rates range from 0.3 tonnes of slag per tonne of metal for blast furnace ironmak-ing to 14 tonnes of slag per tonne of metal for ferronickel production [1]. Global annual slag production is estimated at 680 million tonnes, with ferrous slags accounting for more than 90% of annual slag production at 610 million tonnes. 
Conventional slag handling operations include air cooling, wet, and dry granulation. Air cooling begins with the slag being dumped into a large open area and left to cool, where in some cases it is subsequently sent to downstream crushers for further processing. Operational challenges associated with air cooling include potential emission of toxic fumes and/or possibilities of dust gen-eration [2]. Excavation from the pit can be facilitated by water spraying, which causes the slag to crystallize and crack; this requires specific safety precautions be taken to mitigate the increased risk of explosions. 
Water granulation is carried out when molten slag is broken apart and quenched with a high-pressure water stream. The process has operational and environmental shortfalls, the most significant being the risk of steam explosions, the need for dewatering, and the energy costs associated with pumping and cooling large amounts of water [3]; water consumption can exceed ten times the mass of slag being atomized. The technology is also unat-tractive in certain areas due to water scarcity. 
Dry granulation is the process of producing granules in the absence of water. Common methods of dry granulation include centrifugal granulation and air granulation. Cen-trifugal granulation utilizes a high-speed rotating cup or disk. Molten slag is poured into the center of the container, spreading on the surface forming a thin film that eventu-ally breaks into slag granules. The process has been used and studied extensively; however, it has been shown to have a low production rate, high equipment and processing costs, and produces large particles [4]. The metallurgi-cal industry has therefore been seeking alternative slag handling methods in the past five decades that address the challenges of conventional slag handling operations, namely, the ability to produce valuable slag products and the ability to recover energy from slag [5]. Air granulation has been studied since the 1980s and has demonstrated success in the production of high value slag products [6]. 
Air granulation, also referred to as air-blast atomiza-tion, utilizes high-velocity air to break apart and quench a stream of molten material. The process is a subset of air atomization which has been adapted for high-viscosity melts; an industrial setup installed by Hatch Ltd. is shown in Fig..1. The process is capable of producing particles ranging from 0.5 to 5.mm [3]. The differences between air granulation and air atomization predominantly come from the geometry, relative placement, and positions of the melt and gas streams, as shown in Fig..2. Air-blast granulation is attracting attention for treatment of different types of slag due to the fact that it is more environmentally friendly, and having lower footprint and processing costs. 
It is proposed that production of powders through air atomization occurs in three distinct stages: wave growth, ligament formation, and finally the development of drop-lets [4]. As expected, the melt properties and operating parameters affect the final shape and size of the particles. Material properties include viscosity, density, and surface tension; operating conditions include gas to melt mass flow rate ratio, the degree of superheating, distance between the liquid and air stream, nozzle geometry, thickness of the liquid stream, and angle of impact between liquid and air. 
The motivation for this research is to correlate shape and size of the particles to these parameters for various types of fluids and operating conditions. Cold fluid modeling with different single-phase liquids is a useful primary tool in establishing the basic correlations of air granulation. This paper presents the experimental results of the effect of the air-to-liquid ratio, the distance between the liquid and air stream, and the liquid viscosity on the shape and size of particles produced from the granulation of water, castor oil, and glycerin, which offer a range of material properties that encompass the viscosity and density of industrial slag. This research is part of an ongoing study whose goal is to fill the knowledge gap related to cross-flow air slag granulation and gain a better understanding of how the characteristics of slag granules can be controlled. 
For a fixed nozzle and atomization system configuration, the dominant factor controlling particle size in air atom-ization is the gas-to-liquid (G/L) flow rate ratio [7]. The dynamic viscosity of the liquid being atomized also influ-ences the final size of the particles. A study by Goudar et.al. has shown that viscosity is the dominant material property influencing particle size [7]. The easiest way of altering the melt viscosity is by increasing its superheat, as shown by Small et.al. [8]. 

Experimental Procedure 
Design of.Atomization Chamber 
The experimental setup used in the present study is shown in Fig..3. The air nozzle measured 10.cm × 0.5.cm and was located below the stainless-steel container. The liq-uid stream was produced by allowing liquid to flow at room temperature under gravity through stainless-steel 
1 3 
containers which produced a flowing liquid sheet with a width of either 4 or 8.cm. The air exiting the nozzle impacted the liquid sheet wherein the fluid was broken apart and dispersed as liquid particles into the granulation chamber. Liquid droplets were collected inside the cham-ber and drained. The granulation process was observed and photographed from the side using shadow imaging. A combination of a high-speed camera and a strobe light was used to freeze the motion of the particles for imaging and subsequent droplet shape and size analysis. 

Liquid Stream Properties 
Liquid flow rates were computed using the respective den-sities and measuring the time it took to fill a 2-L beaker. The liquid flow rates and viscosities of the single-phase liquids used in the present study are shown in Table.1. 

Air Stream Properties 
The axial gas velocity at the exit of the nozzle was meas-ured using an anemometer probe. Knowing the dimensions of the nozzle allows for the computation of the gaseous mass flow rate, which are shown in Table.1. 

Distance Between Air Stream and.Liquid Stream 
The length of the air stream represents the distance between the air nozzle and the point where granulation occurs. The setup, resulting in an air stream length of 35 cm, is shown in Fig. 4. The different lengths investi-gated in the present study are shown in Table.1. 

Characterization of.Atomized Liquids 
Air atomization typically produces wide particle size distri-butions. The particle size distribution was characterized by identifying the mean particle diameter (d50, i.e., the diameter at which 50% of a samples mass is comprised of smaller particles) and the Sauter mean diameter (d32, i.e., the diam-eter whose ratio of volume to surface area is the same as 
Fig. 5 Time required to achieve constant mean particle size values during the granulation of cold fluids 
that of the entire droplet sample). For the purpose of these calculations, particles were assumed to be perfect spheres. The actual shape of particles is characterized by identifying the aspect ratio. 
Image analysis was performed using ImageJ software [9], which was used to examine the shape and size of par-ticles produced. The scale was set by using a piece of cop-per wire of known dimension (1.02.mm), giving a scale of 69 pixels/mm. Each experiment was repeated a mini-mum of two times and ran for a minimum duration of 15.s, which was identified as the time required to reach consist-ent d50 values, as shown in Fig..5. The maximum relative difference between the particle sizes in repeated experi-ments was observed to be 7%. An example of images used for further analyses is shown in Fig..6a. When performing the image analysis, special care was taken to remove any particles that were not in focus. An example of the same image post-processing is shown in Fig..6b. 


Results and.Discussion 
Theoretical Treatment 
Atomization occurs as a result of the kinetic energy trans-fer between the gas and liquid stream. The kinetic energy is dissipated to overcome the viscous forces that resist deformation and to overcome the surface energy forces that resist the formation of new surfaces. The ratio of energy required to overcome viscous and surface tension forces, can be expressed in terms of liquid phase Weber and Reynolds numbers, Eq.(1).
 As the gas continues to travel after atomization, at a reduced velocity and pressure, and also the fact that gas jet is wider than the liquid sheet, it is reasonable to assume that only a certain fraction of the gas kinetic energy at the interaction point is used to overcome the surface energy forces. This fraction is denoted with the variable β in the kinetic power equation, Eq.(2). 
This energy is fully consumed for break-up of the stream to a certain number of droplets. The surface energy of this particle cloud per unit time can be presented as Eq.(3). 
For a given mass flow rate of liquid, Eq.(3) can be rewrit-ten as Eq.(4). 
To satisfy the surface energy requirements for the production of new particles, the kinetic power has to be equal to that of the surface energy created in unit time, Eq.(5). 
A schematic of the expansion of the air sheet over the length of the air stream (L) is shown in Fig. 7. The area at the point of atomization is related to the original area by Eq.(6). It should be noted that the thickness of the air sheet is assumed to be much smaller than its width and it is also assumed that there is no pressure change over the short distance. The constant K′ is a relationship between the angle of expansion and the original thickness of the air sheet, as shown in Eq.(7). The average particle size in terms of initial operating conditions and material proper-ties is shown in Eq.(8). 

Experimental Results 
Table.1 shows the details of the experiments conducted during this study. In total, 15 different experiments were conducted at room temperature to investigate to effect of the gas-to-liquid ratio, distance between the air nozzle and crash point and the viscosity on the particle size. The mean and the Sauter mean diameter for each experiment are given in Table 1. 

Effect of.G/L Ratio on.Particle d32 and.Aspect Ratio 
Figure.8 shows the particles size distribution of water. The mass fraction graph indicates that the majority of particles present are between 400.μm and 800.μm. Small sizes < 150 μm as well as large sizes greater than 850.μm show lower mass fractions relative to other ranges. The double-hump distribution was consistent with all the other water modeling experiments conducted in this study. This is believed to be a result of two atomization modes, the pri-mary one with wave propagation and stream break-up and a secondary mechanism in which larger drops are broken into finer drops through an attrition-like mechanism [10, 11]. Only a portion of particles will undergo secondary atomiza-tion, causing the double-hump distribution. 
Typically, the droplet size is presented versus mass flow rate ratio of gas to liquid (G/L), as shown in Fig..9. It can be observed from the results that an increase in G/L flow rate ratio results in a decrease in the particle size. Atomization occurs as a result of kinetic energy transfer from the atom-izing medium to the liquid, larger G/L ratios have a greater kinetic energy available for sheet disintegration, resulting in smaller overall particles [12]. 
According to Eq..(8), when the pressure of the air stream is relatively constant, the particle size should follow a linear 
oo
relationship with m 3 ∕m . Figure.10 tests the correlation, 
gl 
showing that a linear trend is indeed followed. 
Figure.11 shows the influence of the gas-to-liquid flow rate ratio on the particle aspect ratio. The aspect ratio describes the relationship between the width and the height of a droplet. The particle aspect ratio is dependent on the difference between the solidification time and the spheroidi-zation time. In the present study, single-phase liquids do not undergo any solidification when atomized resulting in the droplets having ample time to spheroidize. The expected outcome was for low-viscosity liquids to spheroidize very rapidly, while liquids with a higher viscosity taking longer to spheroidize. Increasing the gas flow rate shortens the time required for droplets to spheroidize by generating smaller droplets, as shown in Fig..11. It is important to note that for high-viscosity liquids the positioning of the camera is very important and will affect the recorded aspect ratio, it is expected that after sufficient flight time the particles will spheroidize completely. 

Effect of.Distance Between Nozzle and.Liquid Stream 
Figure.12 shows the effect of the distance between air nozzle and the disintegration point. As shown, increasing the length of the air stream results in an increase in the particle size. This increase in particle size can be attributed to the loss of disintegration energy as the air has to travel a longer dis-tance to reach the liquid stream, and also the reduction of air velocity due to expansion while traveling towards the liquid stream. This can be confirmed by looking at Eq.(2), where a reduction of velocity would lead to less energy being avail-able for granulation. As the length continues to increase, the mean particle size will increase rapidly until atomization eventually stops as the minimum kinetic energy require-ments would not be met to cause any sheet disintegration. 
In the present study, the particle size was related to the length of the air stream (L), by fitting the geometric parameter K′, this was then used to calculate the particle size. Figure.13 compares the calculated and measured d32 values with change in length of the air stream. The calcu-lated d32 values are obtained by optimizing the thickness From the value of K′, the expansion angle of the air jet was calculated to be 0.2o. This implies very small expansion of the air stream, which is expected as the longest distance examined was 35.cm and the outlet air velocity was very high. It was also evident during the experiments that the disintegration takes place at approximately the same posi-tion of the falling liquid stream, showing little expansion of the air jet. 

Effect of.Fluid Properties 
Figure 14 shows the viscosity versus the particle size for liquids with different viscosities at constant G/L flow rate ratios. Although the number of data points is not large enough to draw a quantitative correlation, it can be seen that as the viscosity increases the average particle size also increases, in what appears to be a linear relationship. This agrees with the works of Goudar et.al. and Mandato et.al. [7, 13]. The Sauter mean diameter for glycerin, castor oil, and water are 1280, 1200, and 510.μm, respectively. An increase in viscosity hinders disintegration leading to larger energy requirements to achieve granulation, hence the reduced particle size. This may be mathematically explained using Eq..(1) where the ratio of viscous to surface tension energies increases linearly with the liquid viscosity. The implication is that the fraction of energy consumed for disintegration which is β in Eq..(8), decreases with viscosity. This is con-sistent with the observed trend in Fig..14, and subject of an ongoing study to include the effects of both viscous and surface energies into a unified correlation that would quan-titatively explain the results of all experimental conditions. 
Figure.15 shows the particle size distribution for glycerin; a similar distribution was observed for castor oil in Fig..16. It can be seen that as the viscosity increases, the mass frac-tion tends towards a single-hump distribution, compared to the double-hump distribution for water (Fig..8). This can be attributed to higher-viscosity liquids resisting secondary drop deformation. It is known that high-viscosity liquids exhibit a greater resistance to secondary atomization [11, 14]. The tendency is quantified using Ohnesorge number which presents the viscous forces to the inertial and surface tension forces and linearly proportional to the viscosity. 
1. Particle size can be controlled by manipulating the G/L flow rate ratio, the length of air streams, and the viscos-ity of liquids. 

2. Larger gas flow rate ratios produce smaller particles due to greater energy available per unit area for sheet disin-tegration. The particle size was related to the mass flow rate ratio of gas and liquid as mg3/ml mass. 

3. An increase in liquid viscosity produces a larger average particle size. 

4. An increase in the distance between the air nozzle and the disintegration point produces a larger average parti-cle size. 

5. Integration of viscous and surface energies involved in liquid atomization appears to be capable of producing a quantitative correlation for prediction of particle size as function of liquid properties and operating conditions. 





















Combined effervescent and airblast atomization of a liquid jet
Effervescent atomization shows great promise towards the production of small droplet sizes, but it can suffer from substantial instabilities. Adding a coaxial shear .ow to a central two-phase bubbly .ow is a simple extension of effervescent atomization, however, the characteristics of a combined air-blasting shear .ow and effervescent mode of fragmentation have not been well described in the literature. By making use of LDA/PDA measurements, high speed microscopic imaging of the atomization zone, and advanced image processing techniques, quantities such as the axial velocity .uctuations, pulsation frequencies, ligament sizes and liquid area fractions are measured and analysed with respect to the relative mass of effervescent air and air-blast air. The work shows that the coaxial air blast .ow does not change the frequency of the effervescent core pulsations but can act to dampen .uctuations whilst simultaneously improving dispersion characteristics. For this hybrid atomization mechanism, the measured axial velocity .uctuations are now a combined result of the instability of the effervescent spray core as well as mixing from the surrounding air .ow. Analysis suggests that frequencies associated with the effervescent atomization process can occur on similar scales as the surrounding mixing frequencies. Furthermore, sinusoidal instabilities from the coaxial air .ow are seen as superimposed onto the effervescent core indicating that a complex coupling can occur between the two modes of atomization.  2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
1. Introduction 
Pressure as well as air assisted atomization techniques are rel-evant to a wide variety of industrial problems, perhaps the most common one being in the combustion of liquid fuels. Airblast atomization, where a coaxially .owing air stream atomizes a cen-tral liquid jet, is widely investigated, with a large volume of litera-ture having examined the in.uence of key dimensionless groups on the atomization process [1–8]. It is now widely accepted that the overall Weber number of the .ow, the mass .ux of liquid with respect to the air .ow as well as the liquid jet Reynolds and Ohne-sorge numbers are relevant to the classi.cation of the fragmenta-tion mechanisms [2]. In general, the atomization regimes can be delineated in a similar way as with air assisted droplet atomization 
[5] 
given that similar phenomena have been observed. More recent work has concentrated on the in.uence of gas phase turbulence on atomization [9] 
re-con.rming the in.uence of the Rayleigh–Taylor instability in these types of .ows, whilst also extending previous work to account for a dimensionless measure of turbulent .uctua-tions. For more details on air-blast atomization the reader is direc-ted to the extensive literature on the subject as reviewed by Lasheras and Hop.ngerg . 
Effervescent atomization, a technique developed by Lefebvre and Wang [10] 
has not yet reached the level of maturity as its air-blast counterpart even though the mechanisms which lead to frag-mentation in this type of atomizer are now broadly understood as reviewed in Sovani et al. [11]. The ratio of effervescent air to liquid mass .ow-rate (the gas to liquid ratio or GLR) is a critical parame-ter that dictates the nature of the bubbly .ow inside the nozzle. The atomization mechanism is largely controlled by the size of bubbles as well as the void fraction in the nozzle (creating bubbly, slug or annular .ow) [11]. The geometry of the atomizer, such as the size and number of aeration holes, ori.ce diameter and GLR all dictate the nature of the two phase .ow and the subsequent droplet size [12–17]. Bubble nucleation is also an important issue in effervescent atomization and this has been studied in a two dimensional con.guration by Lhuissier and Villermaux [18]. Effer-vescent atomization has also been utilized in combustion, where rather than aeration using air, a .ammable gas is injected into the liquid serving both as the atomizing gas as well as part of the combustible mixture [19]. Gadgil and Raghunandan [20] 
examined instability characteristics in greater detail including quantifying the bursting distance which leads to atomization, while other work by Schroder et al. [21] 
has analysed instabilities in very viscous liq-uids. Computations of effervescent atomization, while scarce, are gradually evolving, and Qian et al. [22] 
have reproduced some aspects of the experimental data, but more development is still needed. 
It is clear from the literature that effervescent atomization occurs only at some liquid jet diameters downstream of the nozzle [11], and this has generally been attributed to the expansion of air as the two phase mixture leaves the ori.ce channel encountering a sudden pressure drop. However, more recent work by Shepard [23] 
suggests that longitudinal instabilities in the .ow direction dictate the atomization process. He argued that atomizing packets resem-ble colliding portions of liquid as opposed to bursting bubbles. This conclusion was a result of observing radially expelled as opposed to spherically expelled liquid. The latter is more representative of a bubble explosion while a longitudinal collision dominates the former, as in Meier et al. [24]. 
In many practical applications where effervescent atomization is likely to be used, it is possible that it is employed in tandem with a coaxially .owing air stream. This hybrid mode would be intu-itively expected to affect the mixing characteristics, droplet size as well as general atomization phenomena. To the authors’ knowl-edge, there has been no systematic investigation which considers the combined impact of an effervescent component driving atomization due to aeration in the liquid, and a coaxially .owing air component which drives atomization due to interfacial instabil-ities. The literature has investigated situations where an air .ow exists both within and external to a liquid annulus [25], however this is different from effervescent atomization where the air is injected directly into the liquid. Additionally, effervescent atomiza-tion is known to be unstable, and though the mechanism of the instability formation requires further investigation, it is known that the instabilities are related to the void fraction in the nozzle [15,21,20,26,27]. Given the pulsations that occur in effervescent atomization, which are nevertheless accompanied by greatly reduced droplet sizes, it is possible that with the addition of an atomizing air-blast component, the pulsating characteristics can be modi.ed. 
In this contribution we present a system which allows for a hybrid atomization mechanism to take place near to the liquid injection nozzle. Making use of laser/phase Doppler anemometry, microscopic high speed backlight imaging as well as advanced image processing techniques, we present and analyse mean .ow and mixing characteristics for the case of effervescent and combined effervescent–airblast atomization. Spectral analysis is performed both on the LDA data as well as on the high speed image sequences in order to examine the in.uence of the airblast compo-nent on the effervescently induced instabilities as a function of blasting air, as well as spatial location in the spray. 
The paper will .rst present the atomizer, and subsequently outlines the experimental techniques used with associated errors. Secondly, we will present key results characterizing this hybrid fragmentation process in terms of morphology. Then, we present and discuss the .ow-.eld and mixing characteristics before ana-lyzing the dominant instabilities and other quantitative features of the near-.eld atomization zone. 
2. Experimental methods 
The atomizer used for these experiments is shown in Fig. 1.It has an overall length of approximately 130 mm and consists of an ‘outside-in’ effervescent component as originally presented by these authors in Kourmatzis et al. [28], but now with a high speed air stream which .ows coaxially to the central two phase liquid core, consisting of standard tap water and air. The effervescent design consists of 16 aeration holes each of a diameter of 
0.75 mm, equally spaced apart by 1 mm and perpendicular to the direction of liquid .ow. For these experiments, the inner diameter of the effervescent nozzle steps down from 2 mm to a .nal ori.ce of diameter Dl = 500 lm. The nozzle, shown in zone A of Fig. 
1 is kept .ush with the blasting air which .ows through a tube of diameter, D = 12 mm. The spray is ejected downwards into atmo-spheric conditions where a variety of cases were investigated as speci.ed in Table 
1. The exit Weber number, de.ned for air blast cases only is given by Weexit . qU2Dl=r where U is the air blast mean velocity, r is the surface tension of water and q the density of air. The GLR values presented suggest that all of the conditions tested here are either in a homogeneous bubbly .ow or slug .ow break-up regime with no case exhibiting an annular break-up .ow, which would typically require a GLR > 5% [11]. Observations of multiple small bubbles within the liquid jet would agree with this assessment. Given the very low air-.ow rates necessary for effer-vescent atomization, a narrow range Bronkhorst (EL-FLOW MFC PN64) gas mass .ow controller was used providing a maximum output of 10 ln/min with ‘ln’ denoting normal litres per minute, with a standard accuracy of 0.5%. The liquid was supplied at room temperature through a FP1/8-20-G-5/81 Tri-.at rotameter with an accuracy of at least 5% over the measurement range. The injected pressure of the air was measured just upstream of the ejection noz-zle and ranged from 15 to 180 kPa, as measured using a Wika Swiss movement analogue pressure gauge with a maximum range of 250 kPa. 

2.1. LDA system 
A commercial laser Doppler anemometry system (TSI Model FSA 3500/4000) has been used for characterization of particle velocity where full details on errors and uncertainties have been provided in Gounder et al. [29]. In these experiments, the receiver is positioned in a 45 forward scattering con.guration where the assembly transmits two pairs of beams with wavelengths 
514.5 nm and 488 nm to measure the axial and radial components of velocity respectively, with typically 10,000 samples in each channel being collected per run. A Bragg cell is utilized to shift one beam from each pair by 40 MHz to allow measurement of velocity in the negative direction. Built-in probe volume correction (PVC) has been implemented to correct for lower detectability of small particles towards the measurement volume edge due to the Gaussian light intensity pro.le. Throughout this contribution, we sub-range velocity statistics and present data which has been sampled from droplet sizes in the range 0 < d < 10 lm. As the PDA instrument cannot measure non-spherical droplets of which a substantial number are present in effervescent atomization, we sub-range over a narrow range of spherical droplets in order to remove bias amongst different spray cases. Additionally, this acts as a close representation of the gas phase velocity so that the mean and rms .ow velocity mentioned throughout the paper is obtained from these LDA measurements, sub-ranged from the droplets in the range 0 < d < 10 lm. Furthermore, given the large velocity gradients which can be present in a hybrid effervescent–airblast atomizer, all LDA data is normalized for velocity bias in real-time. 
Where an FFT is conducted on the LDA data, there is a restric-tion on the maximum frequency measurable which is dictated by the frequency of particle detection through the LDA probe volume. Therefore, at outer radial locations, where generally lower particle concentrations are present, maximum frequencies measurable in some instances could not exceed 600 Hz without introducing aliasing. 

2.2. Imaging system 
A high speed diode laser operated at 532 nm and 10 kHz was employed as the high speed light source (Edgewave INNOSLAB model HD3011E) for the microscopic imaging studies and is placed in a backlit arrangement from the camera. The average laser power used in these experiments was 20 W resulting in 2 mJ/pulse. Two opal glass diffusing optical components were used to diffuse the light before crossing the measurement volume. A High Speed Star 6 LaVISION camera, synchronized to the laser at 10 kHz was used with a Questar QM100 long working distance microscope objec-tive. In these experiments, the spatial resolution of the system was approximately 3.7 lm per pixel with a total imaging window size of 768 pixels square. For each downstream location and for each case investigated, 3000 images were collected. Instability res-olution is a key aspect of the work presented here, and as will be shown in later sections of this paper, most atomization modes were in the range of 400 < f < 600 Hz. Hence, with an image sam-pling rate of 10,000 Hz and 3000 image samples in total, 150 images are available to resolve the 500 Hz frequency. The image processing script and methodology employed has been fully docu-mented in Kourmatzis et al. [30] 
along with a detailed account of uncertainties. Brie.y, the image processing technique accounts for defocused objects through a calibration against monodisperse droplet streams, while it also statistically accounts for droplet merging through an appropriate choice of binarization threshold. 
The technique itself has been validated against typical air-blast sprays through comparison with PDA measurements, showing errors in SMD that do not exceed 12% [30] 
with errors in monodis-perse size estimation not exceeding 10% on average. 
For global scale imaging of the spray down to a .eld of view of approximately 50 mm, a Nikon-SLR camera was used with a mea-sured .ash pulse width of 15 ms, providing line integrated Mie Scattering images. A black background was placed behind the mea-surement volume and all images shown have been colour inverted for ease of observation. 
3. Atomization morphology 
Fig. 2 shows some typical instantaneous global scale images of the atomization process over a total distance of 50 mm which encompasses both the initial primary atomization zone as well as regions where entrainment and dispersion take place. This is con-sistent with other work by Kourmatzis and Masri [9] 
which has shown that the primary atomization region is generally completed within a few liquid jet diameters over this Weber number range. From a qualitative point of view it is clear that going from columns 

Fig.2.Aselectionofimagesshowinggeneralfeaturesoftheatomizationprocesswherethewidthofeachimageis50mm.RowsRa–Rdshowanincreaseinthemeanblastcarrierairvelocityfrom10,20(Bl1),30(Bl2)to47m/sandcolumnsCa–Ccanincreaseintheeffervescentair.ow-ratefrom0,0.46(GLR=0.9%,Ef3)to1.39g/min(GLR=2.7%,Ef4).Forallcasestheliquid(water).ow-rateiskept.xedat52.3g/min.Ca to Cc, a .ner mist is observable when compared to going from rows Ra to Rd, and this is indicative of the ef.ciency of effervescent atomization when compared to the airblast mode. For cases with a lower GLR, including ones not shown here, the effervescent com-ponent only acts to destabilize the liquid column slightly, injecting bubbles into the liquid core in such a way that a .ne mist is not observable. In those situations, the addition of an airblast compo-nent has a substantial effect on the overall dispersion of the spray and this is clearly seen through column Cb going from Ra to Rd, where large scale motions in the surrounding gas phase entrain into the central column promoting mixing. The arrows shown on column Ca will be referred to in a later section and indicate the typical lengthscale of large scale instabilities which occur due to entrainment from the surrounding air. 
In the case of more substantial effervescent air, such as that of column Cc with a GLR of 2.7%, the degree of dispersion is substan-tial over all values of the air-blast component showing a lesser dependency of the overall degree of dispersion from the air-blast mode. However, as will be seen through later results, the air-blast component still acts to improve mixing in the primary atomization zone. It also assists in the removal of dominant unde-sired instabilities from the effervescent mode; features that are not observable from Fig. 
2, but considered in the following sections. 



3.1. Microscopic imaging: effervescent atomization 
Fig. 3 shows high speed image sequences for cases with no air-blast component and a GLR of 0.1%, 0.4%, 0.9–2.7% from top to bot-tom for the liquid .ow-rate speci.ed in Table 
1. Concentrating on the top row, large in.ated and isolated liquid bags are observable in the central column which, through observation of hundreds of images for this case, are generally not statistically likely for cases with a GLR greater than approximately 0.5%. For the case of the GLR of 0.1% some of the structures that are observable, shown here in the .rst two frames of the top row, represent a radial bulging of the liquid that is not consistent with a bubble explosion event. This observation has also been made in Shepard [23] 
and may support the existence of axial velocity .uctuations, as in Meier et al. [24] 
which partly drive the effervescent atomization process. For larger GLR ratios, the bag like structures tend to coalesce together which indicates that an upstream portion of liquid moves faster than its downstream counterpart. This coalescence leads to instability which can further atomize the liquid jet. 
Moving on to the third and fourth rows, more substantial atomization is observed. For the highest GLR case shown in the fourth row, the higher void fraction destabilizes the liquid column and leads to atomization which occurs from the core outwards. This type of atomization is markedly different to what would be expected in the case of a laminar liquid jet exposed to a high speed coaxially .owing air stream. In these cases, atomization is driven by interfacial instabilities and therefore begins at the surface of the core. 

3.2. Microscopic imaging: hybrid atomization 
Fig. 4 shows the in.uence of blast air on an effervescent mode of atomization. The top three rows show case Ef3 from Table 1 with an air-blast velocity of 10, 20, and 30 m/s and the bottom row shows case Ef4 with an air-blast velocity of 30 m/s. Comparing row 1 of Fig. 4 with row 3 of Fig. 3 similar features are visible, and portions of liquid are being expelled radially outward. Whilst the time resolution to con.rm that these radial expulsions are due to collision events is not available, the morphology is in qual-itative agreement with the arguments of Shepard [23]. At a velocity of 20 m/s some sinusoidal instability can be discerned although this is not clear until a blast velocity of 30 m/s shown in the third row of Fig. 4. 
Comparing the third row of Fig. 4 to the third row of Fig. 3 the in.uence of the coaxial air.ow is apparent. In the third row of Fig. 4, bubbles are clearly visible in the liquid core and these are superimposed with a sinusoidal instability from the surrounding air with the liquid column having thinned. The reader should note that the liquid jet is not less atomized in this area (as will also be seen in Section 6). This particular image sequence has been chosen to highlight the presence of a primary instability superimposed  onto the effervescent core. A feature not observable in the pure effervescent cases. 
The fourth row of Fig. 4 shows that even with the higher effer-vescent air contribution, superimposed instabilities are still observable. The reader should note again that these images have been chosen to highlight the superimposed instabilities from the air-blast mode. Through observation of hundreds of other images not shown here, it is very clear that the case of the fourth row of Fig. 4 
exhibits substantially more atomization than that seen from these selected images. The reader is directed to Fig. 3 for a better visualization of the in.uence of the effervescent mode on the atomization morphology. 
Fig. 5 shows case Ef3 at three different blast velocities (10, 20– 30 m/s from top to bottom) but at 5.3 mm downstream from the exit plane. The blasting component of 10 m/s has no visible in.uence on the liquid core and therefore the top row also resembles a typical sit-uation with no blasting air. Unlike at 2.5 mm from the exit plane, where substantial differences were observable from the typical snapshots presented, slightly further downstream the differences are not as obvious. In general, for this effervescent case whilst also for case Ef4 not shown here for brevity, the blasting air does not act to qualitatively change the spray morphology which occurs downstream of the primary atomization zone. However, this does not necessarily mean that the rates of atomization are the same amongst the pure effervescent and hybrid modes, given that the atomization will be dictated by the mean .ow .elds, as well as the turbulence characteristics, both of which are markedly different amongst the sprays. This is examined next, while the quality of the atomization will also be examined in Section 6 onwards. 4. Flow-.eld pro.les Fig. 6 shows the mean velocities Umean and the rms of velocity .uctuations urms for case Ef4 with no blast velocity, and with blast level Bl1 and Bl2 as de.ned in Table 1, at a variety of downstream locations. Cases Bl1 and Bl2 of Fig. 6 are the sprays shown in (Rb, Cc) and (Rc,Cc) of Fig. 2. Concentrating .rst on the top row of Fig. 6, showing the mean velocity, it is clear that the addition of an air-blast component acts to increase the mean velocity at the centre of the spray, but it also alters the velocity pro.le of the .ow at the exit plane. This is a result of entrainment from the surrounding air acting to enhance mixing between the air blast stream and the central effervescent air core. The in.uence of the air-blast mode is particularly clear going from Ef4 to Ef4Bl1 where between r=D .0 and r=D .t=:5, the gradient in velocity has diminished signi.-cantly with the addition of the air blast component. 


4.1. Turbulence felds 
Through observation of the second row of Fig. 6, we can see that the addition of the air blast component has acted to reduce the axial rms of the velocity .uctuations. With the effervescent com-ponent, as discussed in Section 3.1, longitudinal .uctuations are largely due to the presence of air in the liquid jet which causes changes in the void fraction and hence in the local velocity mea-sured. The air blast mode acts to decrease the magnitude of these velocity .uctuations whilst also increasing the level of turbulence surrounding the liquid core. The pro.le of the rms shows these two distinct peaks within the .ow, one marks the peak of the axial instability occurring in the central core driven by effervescent air .uctuations, and the other outer peak, occurring in the surround-ing air, is driven by the air blast mode. This argument can be sub-stantiated due to the absence of the double peak feature of the pure effervescent case of Fig. 
6(d), where the axial rms is driven by instability in the effervescent core. In addition to showing a complex .ow-.eld, this also indicates another possible practical advantage of the addition of an air blast component wherein insta-bilities can be dampened in the core whilst improving the mixing .elds in the surroundings. This will be substantiated upon presen-tation of frequency spectra in Section 5. 
Fig. 7 displays the same measurements as in Fig. 6 but now showing the in.uence of going from effervescent case Ef3 to Ef5 for a .xed blast level of Bl2. Unlike case Ef4 shown in Fig. 6, case Ef3 is poorly atomized in the centre hence resulting in a dense core with a velocity closer to the liquid jet as shown in Fig. 7(a). Case Ef5Bl2 of Fig. 7(b) shows a very similar pro.le of the mean axial velocity as with Ef4Bl2 from Fig. 6(c) hence suggesting that at a GLR of 2.7% and above, the effervescent component atomizes the core ef.ciently, given that a statistical increase in velocity would be related to a lower population of larger fragments. The axial rms values of the second row of Fig. 7 show high gradients in the centreline and observations that can generally be made upon observation of Fig. 6. However, case Ef3 shows an rms value which is higher at x/D = 2.5 when compared to x/D = 0. The precise reason for this is unknown though it is likely attributed to the poor atomization at the exit plane which result in a central liquid core with instabilities that only develop much further downstream. 5. Instability characteristics In Section 4 a key result with regards to the role of the air blast component was that it can act to reduce the velocity .uctuations in the centreline. Additionally, the hybrid mode can broaden the velocity pro.le and introduces two shear layers, as shown by the double peak in the rms pro.les. From the literature it is well known that effervescent atomization is unstable [15,21,20,26,27]  and therefore it is of interest to examine the nature of the instabilities in the context of a hybrid atomization system. This is particularly important given that effervescent atomization is driven by intense .uctuations that occur in the liquid core. This is substantially different from air blast atomization which is a combination of inter-facial instabilities and gas phase mixing. 

5.1. Velocity time series FFT 
The instability frequencies are .rst examined through spectral analysis of the velocity time series from the LDA measurements. The FFT amplitudes are all normalized by their respective centreline values. Observing Fig. 8(a) and (b) it is clear that regard-less of the air blast component, the dominant frequency at the core of the spray is similar to within a few percent. This is in agreement with the results of Section 4.1 which showed that the peak in the axial velocity .uctuations did not fully dissipate with the addition of air blast. Fig. 8(a) and (b) also shows that by r/D = 0.09, the normalized FFT amplitude for the hybrid case is similar to that of the pure effervescent case at r/D = 0.13. This clearly indicates the ability for the hybrid mode of atomization to dampen frequency instabilities closer to the central core. The results indicate that in applications where instabilities are to be avoided, the addition of an air blast component can dampen frequency .uctuations closer to the injection point. 
The reader should note that the frequency spectra can also be determined from the blockage area, or the counted ratio of ‘spray pixels’ eNST to total pixels eNT T. A spray pixel here refers to a pixel in the image where a fragment or portion of a fragment is located. This is determined after binarizing the image as described in Kour-matzis et al. [30], such that a spray pixel is a ‘black’ pixel of inten-sity value 1 and any other pixel is part of the background, with intensity value 0. In the context of a spray, this can also be consid-ered as a measure of the area fraction. An FFT analysis of the block-age area for case Ef4 and Ef4Bl2 (not shown) yielded frequencies of approximately 500 Hz. This compares very well with the estimate from the LDA velocity time series. The results con.rm the LDA spectra but also demonstrate that the instability in the axial veloc-ity .uctuations are inextricably linked to the variation in the area fraction, or blockage area of the liquid core. 

5.2. Analysis of frequency response 
To summarize so far, the overall frequencies measured have not shown sensitivity to the addition of an air-blast component. 
Additionally, in the case of a pure air blast component, in these experiments, a dominant frequency was not measurable from the time resolved microscopic images at the exit plane, and in all cases this suggests that the effervescent component dominates in that near-.eld region. 
Generally however, dominant break-up frequencies do exist for pure air-blast atomization. One frequency is associated with the overall ‘break-up’ frequency which has been measured by Raynal 
[31] whilst a general shedding frequency has also been estimated by Engelbert et al. [4]. Such frequencies have also been con.rmed by Kourmatzis and Masri [32] in other work, however here, pure air-blast frequencies cannot be accurately measured as the full break-up of the pure air-blast mode cannot be visualized in a single .eld of view. In the context of the sprays studied here, of particular interest is to compare the dominant effervescent frequency mea-sured, to those associated with large scale mixing. This large scale mixing is a key aspect of air-blast atomization given the coaxial .ow which encourages entrainment from the surrounding air [2]. The arrows on Fig. 2 show the size of typical instabilities acting on the overall spray core which are largely related to entrainment. These are not to be confused with the primary instability which occurs at the exit of the liquid nozzle and is much smaller, gener-ally of the order of the liquid jet diameter as reviewed elsewhere [2]. 
Some typical larger instability length-scales K have been mea-sured for cases of a pure air blast component with a velocity of 10, 20, 30 and 47 m/s and these are of the order of 19, 9, 7.5 and 7 mm. These waves are considered to travel along the main spray core at a velocity given by the cluster velocity, empirically de.ned by Engelbert et al. [4] 
by Eq. (1): . 2 T where UG is the blast air mean velocity and Ul the mean liquid jet velocity. Determining a global frequency as f . VC =K gives val-ues equal to 58 Hz, 333 Hz, 557 Hz and 909 Hz for velocities of 10, 20, 30 and 47 m/s respectively where the cases of a mean of 20 and 30 m/s are representative of cases Bl1 and Bl2 of Table 1. These fre-quencies are of the order of the dominant effervescent frequencies examined here, where cases Ef1–Ef5 of Table 1 ranged from 300 to 600 Hz. This indicates that the dominant effervescent pulsation frequencies can be of the same order of magnitude as dominant mixing frequencies originating from large scale instabilities, due to the air-blast mode. Therefore, there will be instances where the rate at which .uid is ejected due to effervescent atomization can be of the same order of magnitude as the rate at which air is entrained into the core. 
6. Blockage area and atomization 
The frequency range has not been observed to change with radial location or with the addition of an air blast component, though the intensity is dampened. However, microscopic imaging of the near .eld zone revealed that some morphological differences do exist amongst the pure effervescent and hybrid variants and this must be analysed further. 
Fig. 9 shows plots of the blockage area or two dimensional area fraction plotted vs. the image number where each image is sepa-rated by 100 ls. The arrows on the plots for Ef3Bl2 and Ef3 on Fig. 9 show typical ‘pulse widths’ where one pulse is indicative of the liquid jet atomizing. A high magnitude of AS=AT indicates a liq-uid jet which is nearly intact whereas a low magnitude indicates its atomized or nearly atomized state. As an example, if measure-ments were made in a constant area liquid jet then a horizontal line with a positive value of AS=AT would be obtained. 
From observation of Fig. 9, the pure effervescent case shows typically longer pulse widths, which indicates that intact liquid cores remain over longer periods, from cycle to cycle. In contrast, for a case where there is some blasting component, upon atomiza-tion due to the effervescent air, the surrounding coaxial air will penetrate the liquid column hence promoting dispersion and atomization and leaving a gap in time where no liquid is visible. This leads to shorter pulse widths. The in.uence of the blasting mode on the total liquid fragment area at the exit plane can be sta-tistically analysed through calculation of the mean blockage ratio referred to here as hAS=AT i and this is provided in the next section. 



6.1. Mean areas and ligament sizes 
Fig. 10 shows the magnitude of hAS=AT i for a variety of cases as bars. Also plotted on Fig. 10 is the mean size of ligaments in the near-.eld. Ligaments have been de.ned as those objects detected in the high speed images with an aspect ratio AR > 3 [30]. Whilst there is the limitation of a single line integrated .eld of view, the binarization routine chosen has been calibrated as shown in Kourmatzis et al. [30] and has proven to yield physically consistent data. Ligament sizes, particularly in effervescent atomization, are critical in describing the atomization process as also observed by Sutherland et al. [33] and therefore we focus on characterization of these objects here. Additionally, the separate analysis of larger fragments with respect to droplets, as also done in Ghaemi et al. 

Fig.11.StandarddeviationofareafractioneAS=AT T0forcasesEf2(GLR=0.4%),Ef3(GLR=0.9%)andEf4(GLR=2.7%)atthreedifferentairblastmagnitudesatx=D =0.44.[27] for effervescent atomizers, is critical in accurately describing the atomization process. 
First of all, we concentrate on the hAS=AT i measurements. Taking case Ef3 as an example, Fig. 10 shows that at x = 2.5 mm and x = 5.3 mm the area fraction change is minimal when going from no blast to Bl1 whereas an increase to Bl2 leads to a substantial reduction in hAS=AT i.At x = 8.1 mm the in.uence of the air-blast component on the mean area fraction is also signi.cant given that the break-up length of the air-blast mode is shifted slightly further downstream as was also discussed in Section 3.2. Similar conclu-sions are reached by observation of case Ef2 and Ef4 though case Ef4 is less sensitive to the blasting mode. This is attributed to the more substantial in.uence of the effervescent mode in case Ef4 on the atomization characteristics of the near-.eld, which is dis-cussed further now in the context of the ligament sizes Dlig . Unlike the area fraction which provides a global measure of the atomiza-tion and dispersion performance including droplet statistics, the ligament statistics deal only with elongated fragments as de.ned in Kourmatzis et al. [30]. 
For case Ef4 at all downstream locations, it is clear that the mean ligament size is largely unaffected by the addition of an air-blast mode, and this is particularly true at x = 8.1 mm down-stream even though the area fraction has decreased slightly. Though substantial differences in the .ow pro.les between a pure effervescent and hybrid mode were noted earlier in Section 4, the added in.uence of the air-blast mode does not largely alter the near-.eld primary atomization characteristics as de.ned by the ligament size. This indicates a signi.cant advantage of a hybrid fragmentation process such as the one employed here, where liga-ment size can be dictated by the effervescent mode, but dispersion, downstream mixing and instabilities can be partly altered by the blast mode. For the cases of a lower level of effervescent air (Ef2 and Ef3), the blasting mode has a substantial in.uence on the liga-ment size at x = 5.3 mm and x = 8.1 mm. However, this is not the case at the exit plane where changes are minimal andeven show an increase when moving from no blast to Bl1 and .nally to Bl2. This increase in ligament size from no blast to Bl2 at the exit plane is attributed to the shift in the break-up length further downstream. 
Further insight can be gained by observing the .uctuation in the area fraction for the various cases and this is illustrated through the standard deviation of the area fraction eAS=AT T0 in Fig. 11. Once more, the in.uence of the blasting mode on the near-.eld atomiza-tion is clear. With the absence of an air-blast component, the .uc-tuation in the area fraction increases substantially with GLR, indicating pulsations in the core. However, the addition of the blasting mode shows, across all GLR values tested, that the stan-dard deviation remains roughly constant and this is particularly true of case Bl2. At low GLR values, higher standard deviations are noted for the hybrid cases when compared to the pure efferves-cent case due to the presence of the blasting mode. This occurs most likely through a combination of interfacial instabilities driven by the high shear at the exit as well as entrainment from the sur-rounding air. 
7. Conclusions 
Characteristics of combined effervescent and airblast atomiza-tion have been investigated through a number of experiments which offer a comprehensive study on the atomization mecha-nisms of this hybrid form of fragmentation. Both global and near-.eld images have been provided showing that the morphol-ogy of a hybrid atomization system is different to that of a pure effervescent system showing a superposition of sinusoidal instabil-ities onto a bubbly two phase core. The pulsating frequency of the effervescent atomization mode does not change even with the presence of an airblast component, however the addition of the coaxial .ow does signi.cantly dampen the intensity of the .uctu-ations. This has been con.rmed both through measurement of axial velocity .uctuations, and through spectral analysis of the velocity time series and area fraction of the sprays. Analysis of the pulsating frequencies with respect to typical instability time-scales suggests that there can be a close coupling between the effervescent a omization frequency and the frequency at which the liquid phase is mixed with the surroundings. Area fraction results show that from one atomizing pulsation to the next, the coaxial .ow allows for entrainment of air in the central core thereby in.uencing the degree of atomization and dispersion when compared to the pure effervescent mode. Furthermore, for GLR levels below 2.7%, the air-blast mode can have a substantial impact on the ligament sizes at the exit plane. The atomization technique demonstrates that whilst effervescent atomization is a more ef.-cient mode of liquid fragmentation, the addition of the air blast component can act to improve dispersion characteristics whilst simultaneously dampening or restricting undesired pulsations. 














TWO-PHASE FLOW SIMULATION OF HIGH-PRESSURE GAS ATOMIZATION EFFECT OF MOLTEN METAL AND ATOMIZING GAS PROPERTIES ON DROPLET SIZE DISTRIBUTION
This paper deals with the physics of high-pressure gas atomization in metal powder production. To gain understanding of the effect of gas pressure on droplet size distribution, a numerical two-phase .ow study is performed using Eulerian-Eulerian Volume of Fluid (VOF) interface tracking method. Annular-slit, close-coupled gas atomizer is considered to atomize molten aluminum using nitrogen as the atomizing gas. Four cases with different gas pressures are considered, while geometry and other operational param-eters are .xed. Characteristics of several interfacial instabilities have been identi.ed at different stages of the atomization process. Despite the increment in the rate of the atomization with the increasing gas pressure, deformation characteristics and the breakup mechanisms remain unchanged. Droplet size and the cumulative volume distributions indicate that the effectiveness of the atomization process increases with the elevating gas pressure. Cumulative volume obtained from the numerical simulations at low gas pressures display similar trends to the experimental results. 
1. Introduction 
Metal powder production is in high demand for its applications in rapid prototyping, injection molding, and additive manufactur-ing. Metal powder used in additive layer manufacturing is required to have precisely tailored metal powder with a certain size, shape, and morphology [1]. Lawley [2] 
reviewed many existing powder manufacturing technologies and discussed the superiority of gas atomization among other methods considering its controllability over powder size distribution. In gas atomization, a pressurized gas is used to atomize the molten metal. Momentum and thermal energy [3] 
transferred from the expanding gas to the molten metal facilitates disintegration and atomization. The rate of interfacial momentum and thermal energy transfer depends on the driving potential and the interfacial area. Since the cumulative interfacial area increases with the atomization process, it increases the atomization rate to several orders of magnitude [4]. The main advantage of the gas atomization is the controllability [5] 
of the powder size, shape, and the morphology. It is important to study the effect of each operating parameter on the atomization process and the powder distributions. 
The atomization process can be divided into two regimes such as primary and secondary atomization (Fig. 
1a). The primary atomization regime starts when the melt interacts with the gas .ow near the melt tip. Then, the melt stream will deform and cre-ate unstable wave-like structures, when it breaks up into ligaments and large droplets. The secondary atomization regime begins fur-ther downstream when the large droplets and ligaments extend due to Rayleigh-Plataeu instability and break up into smaller dro-plets. This breakup process will continue until the critical Weber number is reached or till the droplet solidi.es [1,6]. 
Several numerical simulations have been performed to study different aspects [7–9] 
of the atomization process. Some of these early studies could not successfully predict the atomization pro-cess as they neglect the strong feedback from the highly dense melt stream [10]. The Eulerian-Lagrangian approach [3,11–13] 
was .rst used to investigate the molten metal atomization and particularly the secondary breakup. The main drawback of these discrete element methods is their inability to predict the primary atomization [10]. These simulations often used random droplet size distribution [14] 
(DSD) to initiate the simulation. Considering these drawbacks, Tong and Browne [10] 
performed the .rst Eulerian-Eulerian based simulations using the front-tracking method. This and other papers [15–17] 
showed that the gas dynamics can be signi.cantly affected by the topological evolution of the melt stream. However, these studies were either conducted in two-dimensional geometries [10,15] 
or considered only the early stages of the atomization process [18]. 
In this study, the gas atomization process of molten aluminum at different gas pressures is studied using the Volume of Fluid (VOF) model [19] 
together with geometrical reconstruction method in OpenFOAM software. The method is Eulerian-Eulerian and does not involve any semi-empirical correlation or any facili-tation of droplet breakup as it occurs naturally without any mod-eling. The effect of atomization gas pressure on the droplet size distribution is investigated. To obtain the effect of inlet gas pres-sure, four inlet gas pressures are considered while keeping other parameters such as melt .ow rates, melt and gas physical proper-ties the same. This paper deals with both primary and secondary breakup processes in conjunction with the calculation of dropsize distribution to understand the trends in gas pressure. Even though a very .ne mesh is required to resolve both types of atomization completely, some characteristics of the secondary breakup process have been identi.ed in the simulation through the calculation of ligament aspect ratio. The objective of this work is to predict the trend of the drop size with pressure and compare this trend with the experimental trend by discriminating dropsize based on aspect ratio. 
2. Computational model 
The computational domain (Fig. 
1) is designed based on a dou-ble induction, discrete nozzle, close-coupled gas atomizer, which consists of 18 circular gas nozzles evenly spaced around the melt tube. The computational domain follows the experimental set up (not shown here) but uses an annular-slit instead of individual nozzles. Since the velocity in the slit is maintained the same as in experiments, the mass .ux is different and only trends in pres-sure can be determined. Once the melt enters the atomization chamber, the interaction with the atomization gas initiates the pri-mary atomization. Larger droplets will atomize into much smaller droplets, while progressing downstream. 
In this study, four gas inlet pressures (1, 1.5, 2 and 2.5 MPa) were used to atomize molten aluminum in the annular-slit, close-coupled atomizer. Fig. 
1b shows a schematic view of the atomizer geometry. Three-dimensional calculations are done in the 90 wedge 
(Fig. 
1c), and the mirror images in the other three quadrants would complete the picture. This is primarily done to reduce the computational power requirement, while imposing two independent symmetry boundaries. Therefore, the results are not fully axi-symmetric as would be the case with a two-dimensional axi-symmetric problem. Axial and the radial lengths of the computational domain are chosen to be 100 mm and 20 mm, respectively to reduce the computational domain which is large enough to determine primary and secondary atomization. A structured mesh with 11.8 million cells was prepared using the blockMesh utility available in OpenFoam. The volume equivalent grid size ranges from 70lm to 700lm. Consider-ing the shape of the cylindrical geometry, grid size increases radially outward. Aspect ratio-based .ltered data corresponding to a .ner mesh with 20.2 M cells (volume equivalent grid size ranges from 50 to 500 lm and 60% of the grid cells are smaller than 100 lm) are compared with the results corresponding to 11.8 M cells. The normalized cumulative volume results show less than 1% change. However, a clear increment in the total number of droplets in the .ner mesh can be observed. All the results shown have been obtained for 11.8 million cells. 
Table 
1 
shows the boundary conditions used in the simulations. k represents the turbulent kinetic energy. The physical properties of Aluminum and Nitrogen are provided in Table 
2. 
A zero-gradient (Neumann boundary) condition for turbulence kinetic energy is imposed on the solid walls for high Reynolds numbers, i.e., turbulence wall function mentioned in Table 
1. The effect of boundary layer developed near the solid wall is assumed to be negligible. Boundary layer developed near the melt-gas inter-face plays a major role in the atomization process. Turbulence intensity is speci.ed at both melt and gas inlets. This boundary condition determines the turbulence kinetic energy based on the speci.ed turbulence intensity and induced mean velocity. To facil-itate reverse .ow, a special outlet condition is imposed for velocity. Nitrogen is used as the atomization gas and constant values are used for density and kinematic viscosity. 
The hydrodynamic Courant number (C . uDt=Dx) is kept at 0.3 and the interfacial Courant number at 0.1. High induced gas veloc-ity ( 1500 m/s) and a suf.ciently .ne mesh restricted the time step required to follow the Courant number criterion for a stable solution to about 10 ns. Considering the number of cells and avail-able computational resources, all the simulations are carried out to the physical time of 2 ms. Computational power required for 1 MPa gas pressure simulation is around 30,000 processor hours (250 pro-cessors for 5 days). 
In this study, the dynamics of the melt-gas interface is simu-lated using the Volume of Fluid (VOF) method, which is discretized using Finite Volume Method (FVM) on OpenFOAM framework. The ‘isoAdvector’ geometrical interface reconstruction method [20,21] 
is used to improve the sharpness of the interface, while ensuring the continuity of each phase. For an incompressible .ow, the mass, momentum and volume fraction conservation equations are as follows. 
where !U is velocity, q density, P pressure, T viscous stress tensor, 
! !
Fb body forces, Fr surface tension force, and a phase volume frac-tion. In VOF method, volume fraction has values of 1 and 0 corre-sponding to liquid and gas phases, while intermediate values represent the interface. Continuous surface force (CSF) method 
[22] 
is used to model the surface tension force as a body force, which only has non-zero values at the interface. The surface tension force is de.ned [22] 
as follows, 
where, r is the surface tension coef.cient, j local interfacial curva-ture and ! n represents the interfacial normal. Density and viscosity are interpolated based on the volume fraction. Large Eddy Simula-tion (LES) is used in these simulations to solve for the large-scale eddies, while modeling small scale eddies. These sub-grid scale (SGS) eddies are modelled following the one equation eddy viscos-ity model [23]. 
A post-processing code is developed to obtain the droplet size distribution using volume fraction. Initially, a threshold in volume fraction is utilized to identify the liquid cell identi.cation numbers. A list is .rst generated including only the neighbor cells that have liquid in them. Then, these sets are compared and appended if they have common elements. The common sets represent the cells cor-responding to each droplet [24]. Special care is given to the calcu-lation of the number and size of droplets that share cells with symmetry boundaries as their sizes and velocities must be updated accordingly. Modi.cations are made to obtain the effect of droplets leaving the computational domain. The code is modi.ed to approx-imate the droplets, which has the potential to leave the computa-tional domain within a given time interval. These approximated droplets are then added to the .nal droplet size distribution. In addition, the aspect ratio (AR) of each droplet was calculated. It is de.ned as the ratio of the longest dimension of the liquid entity to the diameter of the sphere with equivalent liquid volume. Therefore, the aspect ratio represents the degree of deformation of a droplet or a ligament with respect to a spherical droplet with equivalent volume. This enables the comparison of the atomization processes, which progress at different rates i.e. varying gas pres-sures are expected to change the rate of atomization. 
3. Results and discussion 
Since a direct comparison of numerical and experimental data is not possible for reasons mentioned in the previous section (i.e., an annular-slit is used in computations with the gas velocity main-tained at the experimental velocity; the use of incompressible .ow; a smaller computational domain), only the trends obtained for different gas pressures are compared. The melt diameter, funnel-length, and gas nozzle angle are maintained the same as in experiments. 
Fig. 
2 
shows a qualitative comparison of the cumulative droplet volume obtained at .ve gas pressures (1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, and 3 MPa). It is clear that the increasing gas pressure facilitates better atomiza-tion in terms of yield. The experimental data show no increase in atomization beyond 2.5 MPa. The normalized volume curve dis-plays a steep slope with respect to droplet diameter. The numerical simulations in Fig. 
2(b) are made at an early stage of atomization, i.e., at 2 ms. Hence, any comparison with experimental powder data made at the end of the experiment after solidi.cation is expected to have discrepancy. The numerical simulations show that up to 300 lm diameter, there is no signi.cant difference in normalized volume for all pressures. The discrepancy becomes large beyond 300 lm. At large pressures, many droplets are seen to exit the control volume, suggesting a larger computational domain may need to be chosen. 
It is important to note that the larger droplets are not .ltered out in simulations as in experiments. To obtain a complete picture of atomization and capture all droplet deformation and facilitate the breakup of a 100 lm droplet, the mesh resolution should be 
of the order of 1010 cells, which is prohibitively expensive. The cur-rent grid does an adequate job of allowing an early stage analysis of atomization. The current computational geometry is 100 mm in length and 20 mm in diameter. Therefore, some of the droplets can leave the computational geometry before breaking up. The post-processing code can approximate the number of droplets that are leaving the computational domain. 
Since the early stages of atomization are analyzed, an approach would be to understand the simultaneous primary and secondary atomization processes and display the size and cumulative volume of the droplet by discriminating based on the aspect ratio of each droplet. This approach is adopted and discussed in the following 3 .gures. 
In Fig. 
3 
shows the breakup process of a small three-dimensional liquid mass. For clarity, this 3-D ligament circled at the top is divided into three ligaments as marked in red, blue and black colors. The ligament marked in red, which was previ-ously attached to the other two ligaments is separated around 510ls (marked in yellow circle). At 550 ls, this ligament is advected with the gas .ow, displaying a neck that will be eventu-ally pinched off into two segments. The ligaments marked in blue and black are extended along their axial direction due to Rayleigh-Plateau instability [25–27] 
when the surface tension minimizes the ligaments into smaller packets with smaller surface area for the same liquid volume. From Figs. 
3 
and 
4, it can be seen that the liq-uid melt undergoes this instability .rst when the cylindrical vol-ume thins and the gas creates more perturbations on the surface. The liquid then collapses under the action of capillary forces again due to surface tension and can be seen to break into smaller dro-plets. These droplets and ligaments are circled in their respective colors to show the breakdown process in the subsequent time intervals. As previously mentioned in literature, these ligaments are subjected to break into smaller droplets to reduce the surface energy density. This instability plays a major role in the secondary atomization process. 
Fig. 
4 
shows the time evolution of 1 and 2.5 MPa gas pressure sim-ulations. The main difference between these two gas pressures is the rate of progression of the atomization process. For the case of 
2.5 MPa, the gas pressure induces a much higher gas velocity and contributes to enhanced atomization due to higher gas momentum .ux. Consider the time evolution of 2.5 MPa gas pressure (second row). First, the gas stream impinges and penetrates the melt stream. At 0.4 ms, the gas penetrates the melt stream and divides it into two portions at the point of impact, while atomization is slower for 1 MPa. The top melt portion moves upwards due to strong gas recirculation for 2.5 MPa to accumulate near the melt tip. Such accumulation of melt near the nozzle does not seem to be a problem for 1 MPa. 
In Fig. 
5, four images at incremental times, images of atomiza-tion, vorticity and turbulence intensity are displayed. The black contours indicate the melt-gas interface. Note that the plane nor-mal vorticity is shown. The positive vorticity values are pointed into the .gure and negative vorticity values are pointed in the opposite direction. The opposite directions in vorticity around the ligaments suggest that the .ow structures induce torque, which leads to rupture. Thus, different types of instabilities con-tribute to secondary atomization. In the turbulence intensity plots 
(i.e – the log scale is used to properly visualize the variations), the turbulence intensity increases near the melt-gas interface. This is due to the chaotic interaction near the melt-gas interface, which creates perturbations and facilitates interfacial instabilities. The boundary layer developed near the melt-gas interface plays a major role in the breakup process, since the shear forces exert on either side determine the deformation of the melt stream and the eventual breakup. The turbulence intensity plots indicate that the turbulence model can resolve these forces successfully. 
The image shown in Fig. 
2 
consists of ligaments, droplets, and liquid blobs during different stages of atomization. Droplet aspect ratio allows one to understand the number of droplets that have possibly undergone both primary and secondary atomization. Fig. 
6 
shows the droplet size histograms for 1 MPa gas pressure. 
Blue represents droplets with AR > 2, and yellow AR < 2. The com-parisons are made at 2 ms. The few droplets that have left the com-putational domain are also included. In general, there is no signi.cant improvement in the droplet distribution as the pressure is increased, although more droplets tend to leave the computa-tional domain. 
In Fig. 
6, most of the droplets are in the range of 100 lmto 300 lm, with the peak around 150 lm. Although 2 ms is in the early stages of atomization, about 50% of the droplets appear to have an aspect ratio of less than 2. It is also clear that it is the 
Fig. 6. Droplet size distributions at 2 ms for 1.0 MPa; AR > 2 (blue), AR < 2 (yellow). (For interpretation of the references to color in this .gure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
secondary atomization that allows the droplet size (and the even-tual powder size) to be small. At early stages of 2 ms, when the atomization process is not completed, it is still possible to .lter the dropsize information based on aspect ratio and dropsize. In fact, this is what is done in the experiments when the larger drops are .ltered out with the sieve. Fig. 
6 
shows that when the condi-
Fig. 7. Comparison of normalized cumulative droplet volume for 1 MPa gas pressure at 2 ms, black line – the original cumulative volume with all the droplets; red line – cumulative volume for droplets, with AR < 2.0 and droplet diame-ter < 300 lm; blue line – cumulative volume for droplets with AR < 2.0 and droplet diameter < 200 lm. (For interpretation of the references to color in this .gure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
tions are imposed to account for the droplets that have AR < 2 and dropsize less than 200 lm and 300 lm, about half the number of droplets .t in this category, and the cumulative volume trends (see Fig. 
7) to the left where the cumulative volume is steeper and higher for smaller size droplets. This is seen to be the case in the experiments as well as shown in Fig. 
2(a). A direct comparison is not possible as an annular slit is used instead of multiple nozzles to reduce the total number of cells, nevertheless, the computations predict the trend well. 
4. Conclusions 
In this numerical study, four gas pressures have been consid-ered for gas atomization of aluminum melt. The atomization pro-cess is simulated using Eulerian-Eulerian two-phase numerical framework. The rate of atomization is seen to increase with increasing gas pressure. Droplet size distributions indicate a clear improvement in atomization. Higher gas pressures tend to advect droplets at a higher rate than they are atomized, which may neces-sitate a larger computational domain. Cumulative volume plot indicates a clear increment in the effectiveness of the atomization with increasing gas pressure. The cumulative volume does not change with pressure for up to dropsize of 300 lm. When the dro-plets are further .ltered based on a smaller aspect ratio (<2) and less than 300 lm, the simulations show a better trend in cumula-tive volume and tend to follow the experimental data. Due to the complex nature of computations, direct comparison with experi-ments for Eulerian-Eulerian simulations is prohibitively expensive. However, these simulations have shown their ability to serve as a good guidance for further controlled experiments. Thus, the main advantage of the gas atomization process is its controllability to obtain powder properties, which can be guided by numerical anal-ysis by changing geometrical or operational parameters. 
Acknowledgements 
This research was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory through cooperative agreement #W911NF-17-2-1072 between the University of Central Florida, United States and the 
U.S. Army Research Laboratory. The views, opinions, and conclusions made in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the of.cial policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Army Research Laboratory or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein. 
The authors also acknowledge the Advanced Research Comput-ing Center at University of Central Florida for providing computa-tional resources and support in obtaining the results reported in this paper. 







