Transonic Turbine Vane EndwallFilm Cooling Using the PressureSensitive Paint MeasurementTechnique 

Abstract
This work focuses on the parametric study of film cooling effectiveness on the turbine vaneendwall under various flow conditions. The experiments were performed in a five-vaneannular sector cascade facility in a blowdown wind tunnel. The controlled exit isentropicMach numbers were 0.7, 0.9, and 1.0, from high subsonic to transonic conditions. The freestream turbulence intensity is estimated to be 12%. Three coolant-to-mainstream mass flowratios (MFR) in the range 0.75%, 1.0%, and 1.25% are studied. N2, CO2, and Argon/SF6mixture were used to investigate the effects of density ratio (DR), ranging from 1.0, 1.5,to 2.0. There are eight cylindrical holes on the endwall inside the passage. The pressuresensitive paint (PSP) technique was used to capture the endwall pressure distribution forshock wave visualization and obtain the detailed film cooling effectiveness distributions.Both the high-fidelity effectiveness contour and the laterally (spanwise) averaged effectiveness were measured to quantify the parametric effect. This study will provide the gas turbinedesigner more insight on how the endwall film cooling effectiveness varies with differentcooling flow conditions including shock wave through the endwall crossflow passage 

Introduction
Film cooling is one of the effective approaches to protect the gasturbine components from being damaged by the high-temperaturemainstream inside the engine during operation. This protection isespecially important on the first stage vane since it has to withstandthe highest heat load from the combustor exit. The film cooling onthe endwall region of the first stage vane is, therefore, a challengingtask for the gas turbine designers due to the nature of the complicated flow field from the strong pressure gradient in the endwallpassage, and the secondary flows including the horseshoe vortices,passage, and corner vortices [1]. The complicated interactionbetween the coolant and the mainstream can make the coolant coverage on the endwall to deviate from the desired scenario.Even not considering the effect of leakage flow from the interfacebetween the combustor and vane, many studies about the possibleparameters affecting the film cooling performance on turbineendwall are available in the open literature [2–9]. However, thereare relatively few investigations focusing on the endwall heat transfer/film cooling under transonic conditions. Although there areseveral papers [10–15] on the film cooling studies under transonicflow conditions conducted on simplified geometries or even thecascade, the conclusions from these studies contradict each otheras the Mach number or the oblique shock wave is found to haveeither a positive/negative effect or no measurable effect on thefilm effectiveness. Among the limited endwall film coolingstudies under transonic flow conditions, Harasgama and Burton[16] performed a heat transfer experiment on the outer endwall of the nozzle guide vane with discrete holes film cooling under an exitMach number of 0.93. They found that placing the cooling holealong an iso-Mach line is a very effective approach to cool thevane endwall. In terms of the Nusselt number on the endwall,there is a reduction up to 75% near the hole exit due to filmcooling; around 50% reduction in most of the other areas with thecoolant-to-mainstream mass flow ratio less than 1.45%. Giel et al.[17] used the steady-state liquid crystal to study blade endwallheat transfer for exit isentropic Mach numbers of 1.0 and 1.3 in alinear cascade. Their results indicate that the shock in the supersoniccase breaks up the smooth Stanton number distribution seen in thesonic case. Also, the Stanton number for the sonic case is actually40–60% higher than the supersonic case. Nicklas [18] investigatedthe heat transfer and film cooling in a linear cascade under exit isentropic Mach numbers of 1.0 and 1.2 using an infrared camera. Hisresults about the influence of the Mach number show an interestingphenomenon. For the downstream of the throat area, there is a 20%heat transfer coefficient decrease in the supersonic case comparedwith the sonic case despite the higher local Mach number in thesupersonic case. He attributed the heat transfer reduction to theeffect of the shock in the throat to the endwall boundary layer,the shock leads to a fast increase of the endwall boundary layeror even separation. Later works from Jonsson et al. [19] and Salvadori et al. [20] studied the heat transfer/film cooling under an outletisentropic Mach number of 0.88. Nonetheless, similar to the aforementioned research, there is no clear clue how the film coolingeffectiveness on the endwall will change under the different transonic conditions. The interaction between the film and the pressuregradient in the endwall is already very complicated, not to mentionif the shock wave is present. Specifically, whether the shock waveaffects the film cooling on the endwall in a similar fashion as the flatplate test remains a question.Therefore, this study experimentally investigates endwall filmcooling by systematically varying coolant-to-mainstream massflow ratios (MFR) and density ratio (DR), with the mainstream conditions from high subsonic to transonic at a given endwall filmcooling design. The present work will help the gas turbine designerto have more understanding of the coolant behavior on the endwallunder the transonic flow conditions. 
Experimental Setup and Method
Five-Vane Annular Sector Cascade. The flow loop of the testrig is shown in Fig. 1(a). As shown in Fig. 1(b), the metal cascadeand the two reinforcement bars for the windows are made by eitherthe selective laser sintering process or aluminum machining. Thetest vane is an aluminum machined piece, while the endwall ismade from a stiff resin material called Somos® PerFORM usingthe stereolithography process. The test vane is of a threedimensional design with a solidity around 0.5 and an aspect ratioof around 0.7. The endwall is contoured to have the passage areacontraction before the leading edge (LE) plane and a step expansionafter the trailing edge (TE) plane, respectively. The current testsection has a wide Plexiglas window coverage extended toaround 1.6Cax both upstream and downstream of the centervane’s leading and trailing edge planes. The three-window designis intended to divide the windows into smaller pieces to reducethe equivalent force that each window has to sustain during thehigh-speed flow. Also, reinforcement bars are installed to provideadditional coverage between the window interfaces. A blowdownfacility is used as the source of the mainstream. It consists of a highpressure compressor, a dryer, and a reservoir. An electronic flowcontrol valve is used to control the mainstream velocity by monitoring and adjusting the pressure in the upstream of the flow loop.The mainstream condition during the tests was continuouslymonitored using the Pitot-Static probes instrumented at 3.81Caxupstream and 0.75Cax downstream of the vanes leading and trailingedge planes, respectively. The probe readings from the downstreamwere used to define the nominal flow condition (exit Mach number) as shown in Fig. 2(a). A turbulence grid was used to create an estimated turbulence intensity of 12% [21] and an integral length scaleof 1.5 cm on the vanes’ LE plane. The grid is located at 7.61Caxupstream of the vanes’ LE plane. It has an equivalent bar widthof 1.43 cm and 54% porosity. The light-emitting device (LED)light and charge-coupled device (CCD) camera are arranged atboth upstream and downstream of the test section for data capturingunder different views 
Film Cooling System. There are two cooling hole rows on theendwall inside the passage, five cylindrical holes at the first row, and three cylindrical holes at the second row as shown in Fig. 2(b).Since the typical upstream portion of the endwall is protected by theinjection from the slot between the combustor and the vane, thecurrent two-row holes are intended to protect the endwall withinthe passage only. It is noted that the hole close to the pressureside at the second row is actually underneath the vanes’ TE dueto the special vane geometry. The diameter (d) of the coolinghole is around 0.14 cm. The injection angle is around 29-deg and17-deg for the first and second row, respectively. They are of different lengths and exit areas due to the curvature of the endwall. Asingle plenum is used to supply the coolant to all the endwallcooling holes. A metal screen and a honeycomb are installedinside the plenum to make sure the coolant pressure inside theplenum is uniform. The uniformity is further confirmed with twopressure taps instrumented on both sides of the plenum walls. Dryair from the compressor loop or the foreign gas cylinders were usedas the coolant. Three different kinds of foreign gas including N2(DR = 0.97 ≈ 1.0), CO2 (DR = 1.52 ≈ 1.5), and Argon/SF6mixture (DR = 1.93 ≈ 2.0) were used. The flowrate of the coolantis controlled using a rotameter, in which the reading is correctedusing the pressure at the rotameter exit 
Experimental Method. The conduction-free pressure-sensitivepaint (PSP) technique is used to capture the film cooling effectiveness on the endwall. PSP is a mixture of luminescent moleculesand oxygen permeable binder. The luminescent molecules in thepaint can be excited by using the light of a specific wavelength(400 nm) to illuminate the painted surface. The correspondingemission intensity from the painted surface is of a longerwavelength (650 nm). It can be recorded by the monochromescientific grade CCD camera (The Cooke Corporation, SensiCam,with 320 × 240 resolution, 16-bit dynamic range). A long-passfilter is attached to the camera to prevent the excitation lightfrom being captured.The PSP’s emission intensity is inversely proportional to theoxygen concentration of the painted surface (oxygen quenching).So, a proper calibration to quantify the variation of the emissionintensity to the oxygen partial pressure on the painted surface isneeded. A typical calibration can be realized using a pressurecontrolled chamber with optical access and a test coupon coatedwith PSP. The test coupon is a small strip of copper sprayedwith black paint, painted 4–5 layers (30–40 µm thickness perlayer) of PSP, and then placed in the chamber. The coupon hasone T-type thermocouple embedded and is attached to a heatingmat. During the calibration, the PSP-coated coupon, LED, andthe camera were arranged to a similar scenario as the real test.The emission intensity variation within the expected experimentpressure range was captured correspondingly. The oxygen partialpressure adjacent to the painted surface is found to be correlatewith the surface emission intensity by a power fitting curve asshown in Fig. 3. In addition, the sensitivity of PSP emission intensity to surface temperature and view angle are described inRef. [9].The center endwall was painted with PSP using an airbrush bythe same procedures as described in calibration. The area in thevicinity of the center endwall including the test vane and the neighbor vanes are painted black to reduce stray reflection. Four imagesets are required to determine the film cooling effectiveness for agiven flow condition. They are the black image, the referenceimage, the foreign gas injection image, and the air injectionimage. The black image set (Ib) is used to eliminate the backgroundnoise from the camera sensor. The reference image set (Iref) is theintensity taken with LED switched on but without flow(wind-off). Two wind-on image sets including the air injectioncase (Iair) and the oxygen-free foreign gas injection case (Ifg) aretaken under the same coolant flowrate with mainstream presents.The corresponding oxygen partial pressures are PO2,air and PO2,fg .One hundred images were recorded in each image set to averageout the measurement noise. 
Test Conditions
To systematically study the parametric effect of varying MFR,DR, and the exit Ma on the endwall film cooling, 33 sets of experiments were performed. Five different MFRs from 0.5% to 1.5%were conducted at the lowest exit Ma case to capture the generaltrend of the MFR effect on this particular endwall film coolingdesign. Three different MFRs from 0.75% to 1.25% were later conducted at higher exit Ma cases. For all the MFR cases studied, DR isvaried from 1.0 to 2.0. The summary of the test matrix is shown inTable 1.Experimental UncertaintyThe fluctuation of mainstream velocity (±3%) and the fluctuationof coolant flowrate (±2%) will contribute to the uncertainty of themeasurement in this experiment. However, the fluctuation of thePSP emission intensity value captured by the camera is consideredthe dominant uncertainty source. By the method proposed by Kline and McClintock [23] based on a 95% confidence level, theuncertainties of film cooling effectiveness deduced from the calibration curve at η = 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, and 0.7 are 15%, 3.9%, 1.7%, and0.7%, respectively, in the present study. The reported uncertaintyrefers to the local values as it is estimated on the raw data basedon the corresponding value of each pixel in the data capturing region.Results and DiscussionPressure and Isentropic Mach Number Distribution. Thestatic pressure distributions on the endwall under different mainstream conditions are shown in Fig. 4. The corresponding isentropicMach number is calculated using the total pressure measured from the inlet pitot-static probe. The individual color bar range is used fordifferent exit Ma cases to find the local variation of the pressure/Maon the endwall. The line (no data) within the passage on the contouris the junction line between the data captured from the upstreamview and downstream view. This line will be included in all the following contour plots. The static pressure, in general, is the highestat around the vane’s LE and then gradually decreases toward theTE. The corresponding isentropic Ma is increasing from LE toTE in the passage. The pressure on the pressure side of thepassage is higher than the one on the suction side, this pressure difference is the source of the crossflow inside the passage and canaffect the coolant distribution. Since the downstream pressure monitoring point (Pitot-Static Probe) is actually out of the passage (flowdecelerates due to further channel expansion) as shown in Fig. 2(a),the isentropic Ma on the endwall especially at the downstream ofthe passage is found to be consistently higher than the nominalflow condition. For exit Ma = 0.9 and 1.0 case, there is a narrowsector-shaped static pressure recovery band (downstream of thedotted line in the close-up dashed box) that starts at right upstreamof the second cooling hole row, which is not observed in lowest exitMa cases. This abrupt Ma change is also revealed in Fig. 4(c). Thiscould be the oblique shock wave originating from the neighborvanes’ TE, as its location is considered similar to the previousstudy [24] based on the same vane’s geometry. However, whetherthe shock wave might affect the endwall film cooling or not willbe discussed in the Mach number effect.Blowing Ratio and Momentum Flux Ratio. For all the MFRsand DRs in this study, the row-averaged blowing ratio and the corresponding momentum flux ratio are calculated. A constant discharge coefficient is first assumed for all the cooling holes atthe first and second rows. With the plenum pressure measuredby the pressure tap, the endwall static pressure and isentropic Ma distribution measured by PSP, the discharge coefficient canbe calculated as 
The local coolant velocity can thus be obtained to calculate thetrue coolant mass flux. The row-averaged blowing ratio andmomentum flux ratio are shown in Table 2.As the coolant from the first and second cooling hole rows aresupplied by a single plenum, it is expected that there will be a relatively small amount of film that comes out from the first row compared with the second row due to the endwall static pressuredistribution. However, since the mainstream mass flux at thesecond row is higher than at the first row, the averaged blowingratio on the second row is found to be lower than the first row formost of the test conditions. 
Mass Flow Ratio Effect. 
DR = 1.5 at exit Ma = 0.7 cases areselected to demonstrate the MFR effect. As shown in Fig. 5,coolant turning can be found for both cooling hole rows as thetrace directions do not exactly follow the hole exit directions. TheMFR effect on the first and second cooling hole row is different.Overall, the current two-row design seems to provide sufficientcoolant protection for the majority of the current endwall passage.The film coverage from the first row demonstrates an increasingthen a decreasing trend when the MFR increases from 0.5% to1.5%. Best film coverage is found to be when MFR = 0.75%.When the MFR increases beyond this point, the shrinking of thecoolant trace right at the downstream edge of the cooling hole indicates the onset of coolant lift-off. Also, it is found that the coolantlift-off does not uniformly happen in every hole at the first row. Butthe surface static pressure does not demonstrate a similar nonuniformity at the vicinity of the first row. One potential reasoncould be that non-uniformity is actually the result of the timeaveraged unsteadiness of the film due to mainstream turbulence.This will require further investigation of the film’s unsteady behavior. On the other hand, the film coverage from the second rowdemonstrates an increasing trend when the MFR increases to1.0% but then gradually levels off for even higher MFR. This behavior difference between cooling hole rows can be attributed to threereasons. First, at the location of the first row, the suction side leg ofhorseshoe vortices from the vane’s LE and the corner vortex fromthe vane’s pressure side are still very close to the surface. So, thefilm from the first row is very susceptible to lift-off. Second, thesmaller surface angle of the second row can make the coolinghole performance less sensitive to coolant lift-off since the coolant’svertical (wall-normal) momentum is reduced compared with thecounterpart of the steeper surface angle (first row). Third, the longer cooling hole length and slightly larger cooling hole exit areadue to the shallow surface angle can lead to a more uniform exitvelocity profile where it is beneficial to have higher effectiveness.Besides, the coolant deflection due to the mainstream is reducedwhen MFR increases (higher coolant momentum). But this behavioris not prominent for trace from the second row which implies thestrong mainstream still dominates the local flow field.Figure 6 shows the laterally averaged effectiveness when DR =1.5 at exit Ma = 0.7. It is worthy to mention that in this study, thenoise level on the region upstream of the first row is not always negligible and does not correlate to the variation of any parameter inthis study. While this noise level varies from run to run, theauthors confirmed that it does not affect the results (magnitude)for the region covered with film traces (X/Cax ≥ 0.3). To preventconfusion in interpreting this noise as the true effectiveness, theupstream of the first row (X/Cax < 0.3) is excluded from all thelateral averaged effectiveness plots in this study. For the upstreamregion (X/Cax < 0.68) which the coolant only comes from the firstrow, it is clear that MFR = 0.75% case has the highest averagedeffectiveness. For higher MFR, the decreasing trend is alsovisible. For the downstream region (X/Cax ≥ 0.68), since the filmeffectiveness contributed by the second row is dominant, an increasing trend then being leveled off averaged effectiveness trend can bedetected similar to the observation in the contour plots. There aresome film (coolant) carryover even after the trailing edge plane,but the data there suffer from the reflection due to the step expansion, so the data after X/Cax > 1.1 are not included in this study.Density Ratio Effect. DR = 1.0 and 2.0 at exit Ma = 0.9 casesare selected to demonstrate the DR effect as shown in Fig. 7. Itshould be noted that, for a given cooling hole design under afixed endwall pressure distribution, the required differential pressure to deliver a given amount of coolant decreases when thecoolant density increases. This implies that the heavier coolant actually is less likely to being ejected from the holes where the mainstream static pressure is high. This is typically the case when thecoolant flowrate is low (so is the corresponding blowing ratio). Ata given coolant flowrate, the heavier coolant also possesses lowermomentum. This is great for better lateral coolant spreading, butthe correspondingly low streamwise momentum can lead to insufficient film coverage in the streamwise direction. However, in thisparticular endwall cooling design, a positive DR effect is observedwhen MFR is as low as 0.75%. This implies that the momentum ofthe heavier coolant is sufficient enough to have a satisfactorystreamwise film coverage. On the other hand, it is found that thewide coolant trace when DR = 2.0 does not demonstrate sufficientoverlapping, leaving the portion between holes unprotected. This could be easily improved by using the shaped hole in the firstrow. The short coolant traces from the second row when DR =2.0 simply implies that the low coolant momentum is inadequateto form a proper film coverage. When MFR increases to 1.0%,the film coverage from the first row reduces but the one from thesecond row enhances. The momentum of the heavier coolant islower compared with the lighter coolant, which is a great advantagein terms of having film stay adhered to the surface instead of lift-off.When MFR is further increased to 1.25%, the coolant lift-off isinevitable particularly for the film from the first row since thecoolant traces are shrinking for both DRs. Nevertheless, a widertrace is still observed when DR = 2.0 compared with DR = 1.0, indicating a positive DR effect.Figure 8 shows the laterally averaged effectiveness for DR = 1.0and 2.0 at exit Ma = 0.9. The trend of averaged effectiveness variation is found to be consistent with the contour plots. The behaviorof the DR effect on the averaged effectiveness from the first rowand second row is found to be the same. This reiterates the fact thatwhile the DR effect can be negative or marginal for the lowcoolant flowrate, within the tested MFR range, a positive DR effectfor the current endwall cooling design can be expected since thecoolant has sufficient momentum (flowrate is relatively high).Mach Number Effect. The performance of the different coolinghole rows is supposed to vary based on the local endwall surface pressure (subjected to the Ma). This will cause the coolant split (redistribution) and affect the film distribution between two rows. So, theobserved coolant behaviors when varying the Ma are considered ascombined characteristics instead of purely from flow compressibility. Three different MFRs when DR = 1.0 and 2.0 casesare selected to examine the Ma effect as shown in Figs. 9 and 10. Thefilm from the first row and second row shows different Ma effects. Inaddition, different MFRs are found to demonstrate different Maeffects as well. For the film from the first row, it is found that thefilm coverage in general increases with the increase of the exit Ma.As the exit Ma increases, the mainstream velocity at the regionnear the first row also increases. This higher mainstream velocityresults in a thinner boundary layer around the first row. The corresponding higher near-wall velocity facilitates the film bendingtoward the wall, relieves the coolant lift-off, and eventually leadsto better film coverage. The positive Ma effect on the film effectiveness is more prominent when the coolant flowrate is high. This phenomenon is consistent with the finding reported by Shiau et al. [24]and Saumweber and Schulz [25]. For the film from the second row,the film coverage variations when exit Ma increases are found to berelated to the corresponding MFR. When the MFR = 0.75%, theeffectiveness is found to decrease significantly when exit Maincreases. But when MFR = 1.25%, the film coverage at exit Ma =1.0 outperforms the Ma = 0.9 case. From Fig. 4(a), when exit Ma = 1.0, the local static pressure rises when flow across the shock wave is observed (narrow high-pressure band upstream of the secondrow). According to Ligrani et al. [13], compared with the casewithout the shock present, the flow deflection occurs across theshock can locally reduce the effective blowing ratio and forcelarger film concentration near the surface. From Figs. 9 and 10, thelarger film concentration near the surface is indeed observed as thefilm for higher exit Ma seems to diffuse and fills the spacingbetween the holes compared with the lowest exit Ma. In addition,as the traces from the second row do not seem to be affected significantly by the endwall flow field (passage vortex), the argument fromLigrani et al. [13] seems to be applicable to the scenario in the presentstudy as well. For low MFR (e.g., 0.75%), the shock reduces theeffective blowing ratio by increasing themainstream local static pressure, which leads to insufficient coolant momentum and thereforepoor film coverage. On the other hand, for the higher MFR (e.g.,1.25%), the effective blowing ratio reduction by increasing the mainstream local static pressure and deflecting the jet could indeedachieve improved effectiveness by relieving the coolant lift-off tendency. However, this might also lead to higher effectiveness in thevicinity of the hole as mentioned earlier, but the film is incapableto propagate much in the streamwise direction.Figures 11 and 12 show the laterally averaged effectiveness forDR = 1.0 and 2.0 at different exit Ma, respectively. In general, the averaged effectiveness is increasing when exit Ma increasesfor X/Cax < 0.68; for X/Cax ≥ 0.68, a decreasing then increasingeffectiveness trend is observed when exit Ma increases. It is alsofound that exit Ma = 0.7 cases have the highest averaged effectiveness for X/Cax ≥ 0.68, but this advantage is diminishing when theMFR increases since the coolant lift-off is weakened by the shockwave when MFR is high 
Matching the Momentum Flux Ratio. 
As the coolant momentum dominates the film behavior, the momentum flux ratio is beingconsidered as the quantity to combine the blowing ratio and density ratio for film performance comparison, especially in the flat platestudy. Based on the row-averaged momentum flux ratio inTable 2, selective cases with the matching momentum flux ratioare compared to evaluate if it can portray the resulting effectswhen the MFR, DR, and exit Ma are varying.For the first row, only two cases when exit Ma = 0.7 have thematching I ≈ 2.8 as shown in Fig. 13(a). It is found that while thefilm distribution seems similar, the traces in higher DR cases are relatively diffused. For the second row, eight cases for exit Ma rangingfrom low to high are having the matching I ≈ 0.3 as shown inFig. 13(b). It is found that except for the cases when exit Ma =0.9, the coolant traces in higher DR cases are wider which meansstronger lateral spreading. In other words, with the same momentumflux ratio, different DR results in different coolant diffusion scenarios. Moreover, it is found that the coolant spreading from the secondrow for high exit Ma is more prominent than the low Ma cases,which is considered due to the shock as discussed earlier. Therefore,it is reasonable to conclude the momentum flux ratio effect is unableto properly describe the Mach number and the DR effects observedin this study 
Area-Averaged Effectiveness. 
The area-averaged effectivenesson the endwall for all the test cases in this study is shown inFig. 14. The endwall is divided into two zones, Zone 1 is fromthe upstream edge of the first row to the upstream edge of the second row; Zone 2 is the region at the downstream of Zone 1.Since there is no coolant coverage upstream of the first row,those areas have been excluded from Zone 1, which means thearea-averaged value will be inherently higher than the laterallyaveraged one. For Zone 1, MFR = 0.75% seems to be anoptimum flowrate for exit Ma = 0.7, when exit Ma increases, adecreasing trend on effectiveness when MFR increases is observedfor exit Ma = 0.9, but the trend becomes to decrease then increasesfor exit Ma = 1.0. For Zone 2, an increasing than being level off oneffectiveness is observed for exit Ma = 0.7, but the trend becomesto increase then decrease for higher exit Ma. The trend for Zone 1and Zone 2 is found to be the opposite when just comparing theresults at MFR = 0.75%, 1.0%, and 1.25%. This could be attributed to the single plenum design as the film coverage variationwhen MFR changes is shifting between the coolant contributedfrom the first and second row.
Conclusions
A parametric study on the effect of MFR, DR, and exit Ma on theendwall film cooling effectiveness measurements was performed ona five-vane annular sector cascade. The film cooling performanceunder different conditions is compared and discussed with regardto detailed film cooling effectiveness contours, laterally averaged,as well as the area-averaged effectiveness. The key highlights ofthe presented study are as below:(1) For this particular endwall film cooling design, increasingMFR has an increasing then a decreasing effect on the filmeffectiveness from the first row; for the film from thesecond row, an increasing then leveled off trend on thefilm effectiveness is observed.(2) Within the tested MFR ranges, a positive DR effect on thefilm effectiveness is observed for both the first and secondrows on the present endwall cooling design.(3) The Ma effect is positive for the coolant from the first row,for the coolant from the second row, the Ma effect dependson the MFR. Negative Ma effect is observed when MFR islow and the positive effect is demonstrated when MFRincreases. Due to the cooling hole location, the film fromthe second row does not seem to be affected by theendwall flow field, so the effect of the shock wave on thefilm is similar to the flat plate test. Because of the plenumdesign, in addition to the flow compressibility, the Maeffect in this study includes the impact from the coolant split.(4) The momentum flux ratio is unable to correlate the film behavior for different flow conditions (varying MFR, DR, exitMa) as the case in the flat plate test.(5) The variation trend of area-averaged effectiveness on Zone 1and Zone 2 at different exit Ma is different. Especially forexit Ma = 0.9 and 1.0, a reversed trend is observed forZone 1 and Zone 2. 