2D mid-infrared laser-absorption imaging for tomographic reconstruction of temperature and carbon monoxide in laminar flames
Abstract
This manuscript presents the design and initial application of a mid-infrared laser-absorption-imaging (LAI) technique for two-dimensional (2D) measurements and tomographic
reconstruction of gas temperature and CO in laminar flames.  In this technique, the output beam from a quantum-cascade laser (QCL) is expanded, passed through the test gas, and imaged in 2D
using a high-speed mid-infrared camera.  The wavelength of the QCL is scanned across the P(0,20) and P(1,14) transitions of CO near 4.8 µm at 50 Hz to provide 2D measurements of path-integrated
gas temperature and CO column density across over 3,300 lines-of-sight simultaneously.  This enabled the first sub-second (0.1 s), high-resolution (140 µm), 2D laser-absorption measurements
and tomographic reconstruction of flame temperature and CO mole fraction using mid-infrared wavelengths.  Prior to entering the test gas, the beam was reflected off two diffusers spinning at
90,000 RPM (≈9400 rad/s) to break the laser coherence and prevent diffraction-induced image artifacts.  This technique was validated with measurements of CO in an isothermal jet and then
demonstrated in laminar, partially premixed, oxygen-ethylene flames despite large background emission from soot and combustion products.
Introduction
Laser-absorption spectroscopy (LAS) is widely used to provide quantitative, calibration-free measurements of chemical species and thermodynamic conditions (e.g., temperature, pressure,
velocity) in a wide range of combustion applications [1].  Typically in LAS, wavelength-tunable laser light with intensity Io is directed through an absorbing gas and the transmitted light intensity
(It) is measured by a photodetector.  Beer’s Law is used to calculate the spectral absorbance (α = −ln(It/Io)) which is then compared with that predicted by spectroscopic models to provide
path-integrated measurements of gas properties along a line-of-sight (LOS). While useful,  many combustion applications demand multi-dimensional measurements of
chemical species and thermodynamic conditions, for example, to resolve the thermochemical structure  of  flames  and/or,  more  generally,  the  spatiotemporal  evolution  of  combustion.   To
meet this need, LAS diagnostics employing multiple LOS [2–8] or mechanical scanning of the LOS [9–12] have been used with and without tomographic reconstruction algorithms to quantify
how gas properties vary in space and time.  In the simplest form, this approach is performed to  provide  spatially  resolved,  path-integrated  measurements  of  species  and  thermodynamic
conditions.  If absorption transitions with appropriate lower-state energy are used, path-averaged properties (e.g., absorbing-species column density, absorbing-species-weighted path-averaged
temperature) can be obtained despite highly non-uniform conditions along the LOS [13].  For
example, Goldenstein et al. [9] and Spearrin et al. [10] developed mid-infrared LAS sensors for
absorbing-species-weighted path-averaged temperature and absorbing-species column density of
H2O, CO, and CO2  in a model-scramjet combustor.  The authors’ mechanically scanned the LOS
in two dimensions (x-y) to map out path-averaged gas properties.  While effective and convenient
to execute in environments with somewhat limited optical access,  this approach can be time
consuming (often requiring minutes per 2D dataset), provides modest spatial resolution (order
1-10 mm) and is not spatially resolved along the LOS.
Alternatively,  numerous  researchers  have  developed  laser-absorption  tomography  (LAT)
techniques to provide tomographic reconstruction of 2D temperature and species fields within
the  measurement  plane  [5, 7, 11, 12, 14–19].    This  approach  provides  the  added  benefit  of
resolving the gas conditions along the line-of-sight; however, it comes at the expense of more
complicated  data  processing  routines  and  steep  demands  for  many  lines-of-sight  (typically
10s  to  1000s  of  LOS  depending  on  the  level  of  spatial  resolution  desired  [14]).   For  these
reasons, LAT techniques developed to date have primarily used near-infrared wavelengths to
exploit relatively inexpensive telecommunication-grade fiber optics (e.g., fibers, multiplexers,
splitters)  and  detectors  [5, 7, 11, 12, 14, 15].   Unfortunately,  confinement  to  the  near  infrared
significantly limits the number of chemical species that can be monitored at combustion-relevant
concentrations,  conditions,  and  spatial  scales.   As  such,  the  majority  of  prior  LAT  work  in
combustion applications has focused on detecting H2O via its combination and overtone bands
near 1.4  µm [5, 8, 11, 12].  Additionally, some work has been done to tomographically image
hydrocarbons via their overtone C-H stretch absorption band near 1.7  µm [7] and NH3  via its
overtone and combination bands near 1.5 µm [20].  To overcome this limitation several researchers
have developed LAT techniques employing mid-infrared wavelengths for tomographic imaging
of temperature, CO, and CO2  [16–19], however these works have relied on mechanical scanning
of the line-of-sight, thereby significantly limiting the temporal and spatial resolutions to the order
of seconds to minutes and mm, respectively.
That being said, there remains a critical need to develop mid-infrared LAS and LAT techniques
with  higher  temporal  resolution  and  spatial  resolution  (e.g.,  less  than  1  second  and  1  mm,
respectively).  Recent work by Wei et al. [21] demonstrated significant progress towards achieving
this goal through the use of laser-absorption imaging (LAI) with a high-speed mid-IR camera.
The authors demonstrated the ability to acquire LAS measurements of temperature, CO, CO2, and
C2H6  along ≈400 lines-of-sight (in a single plane) simultaneously to provide 1D measurements
and reconstructions of gas temperature and species concentrations.  Diffraction-induced noise
and image artifacts prevented use of the entire focal plane array and, thus, mechanical scanning
of the measurement plane (in the axial direction) was required to achieve 2D measurements and
reconstructions of flame structure.  Using this technique the authors’ were able to acquire LAS
measurements with a spatial resolution of near 50 and 125  µm in the horizontal and vertical
directions respectively, and a 2D image of flame properties was acquired in < 10 seconds [21].
As a result, this approach provided ≈ 10× smaller spatial resolution and ≈ 100× better temporal
resolution compared to more conventional LAT techniques that rely on translating the LOS in
both the x- and y-direction.
Here we present the development and application of the first mid-infrared laser-absorption
imaging technique capable of providing 2D-measurements and -tomographic reconstruction of
flame temperature and CO concentration without mechanical scanning of the measurement plane.
This was achieved by performing high-speed, 2D imaging of scanned-wavelength, mid-infrared
laser light that was reflected off two ground-glass diffusers spinning at 90,000 RPM prior to
passing through the flame.  Spinning the diffusers was required to break the optical coherence
and,  thus,  prevent  diffraction-induced  image  artifacts.   This  approach  enabled  the  following
advancements in mid-IR LAI: 1) a 8x increase in the number of simultaneous measurement paths
(≈3,300 LOS here compared to 400 LOS in [21]) and 2) a ≈20x improvement in 2D-measurement
time (0.1 seconds here compared to ≈2 seconds in [21]) by avoiding the need to mechanically                                                                          
scan the measurement plane.  We demonstrate that this approach enables 2D measurements of
thermochemical flame structure on near-cm scales with a projected pixel size of ≈ 140  µm and
a  time  resolution  as  small  as  0.1  seconds  (i.e.,  10  Hz).   The  remainder  of  this  manuscript  is
primarily devoted to presenting the design and evaluation of the optical setup and describing how
this LAI technique was applied to provide 2D-measurements and -tomographic reconstruction of
flame temperature and carbon monoxide concentration in flames.
2.    Technical approach and equipment
Figure  1  illustrates  the  experimental  setup  used  for  LAI  of  temperature  and  CO  in  partially
premixed,  oxygen-ethylene  flames.   A  continuous-wave  (CW)  quantum-cascade  laser  (QCL)
providing  30  mW  of  optical  power  at  wavelengths  near  4.8  µm  was  used  to  provide  2D
measurements of absorbance spectra.  The wavelength of the laser was scanned across the P(0,20)
and P(1,14) absorption transitions of CO near 2059.9 and 2060.3 cm−1, respectively, at 50 Hz
via  injection-current  tuning  with  a  700  mV  peak-to-peak  triangle  wave.   The  QCL’s  current
was  scanned  below  its  threshold  current  to  enable  the  background  and  flame  emission  to  be
measured in each pixel immediately before each scan.  The wavelength scanning of the QCL was
characterized using a solid germanium etalon with a free-spectral range near 0.0163 cm−1.  It is
worth noting that the absorption transitions employed here have recently been used to measure
gas temperature and CO in several other combustion environments (e.g., scramjet combustor [10],
pulse-detonation engine [3], and propellant flames [22]).  We refer the reader to [10] for additional
details regarding why these absorption transitions are well suited for studying combustion gases.
A custom built optical assembly (see Fig.  1(a)) was used to expand the laser beam and break
its coherence to prevent diffraction-induced image artifacts (see Section 3) that formed by passing
coherent laser light through apertures in the beam-shaping optics and camera.  The laser beam
was immediately expanded by a 12.7 mm diameter, AR-coated, CaF2, concave lens with a focal
length of -18 mm.  The expanded beam was then directed to a gold-coated, ground-glass diffuser
(ThorLabs DG10-120-M01) with 120 grits/inch (≈ 50 grit/cm).  The gold coating provides > 97%
reflectance  at  an  angle-of-incidence  (AOI)  of  12◦  for  wavelengths  near  4.8  µm.   The  diffuse
reflection was then collimated by a 25.4 mm diameter, AR-coated, silicon lens with a focal length
of 25.4 mm and the beam was then focused onto a second diffuser using a 25.4 mm diameter,
AR-coated, CaF2  lens with a focal length of 40 mm.  The AOI for both of these diffusers was
approximately 20◦.  When aligning the diffusers, the beam was directed to the outer edge of each
diffuser to concentrate the beam onto regions of each diffuser with the highest velocity (while
spinning),  thereby providing more rapid scrambling of the laser light’s coherence.  After the
second diffuser, the laser light was partially collimated by a 50.8 mm diameter, concave mirror
with a focal length of 100 mm.  Close to the viewing plane, the beam was passed through a final
25.4 mm diameter lens (CaF2, focal length of 200 mm) to collimate a portion of the beam which
was directed through the flame and into the high-speed IR camera.
Both of the diffusers were mounted in 25.4 mm diameter lens tubes which were mounted to
a custom aluminum adapter (using two set screws) in order to attach each diffuser to a motor
(Castle Creations 1406 Sensored 4-Pole Brushless Motors, 7700kV). The motors were powered
by Mamba X sensored motor controllers.  The motors for the first and second diffusers were
supplied with 26 V DC and 5 and 7 A of current, respectively.  With the diffusers mounted to the
motors, both motors were capable of spinning at 90,000 RPM (≈9400 rad/s).  Due to the high
angular velocity, care was taken to balance the diffuser assembly during machining and shim
stock was used to properly seat the diffuser in the diffuser holder.  Failure to properly balance the
diffusers can cause extreme mechanical vibration which can misalign the optical setup or, at best,
introduce unwanted noise and oscillations in the light intensity imaged by a given pixel.
The laser light was imaged by a Telops Fast-IR 2K high-speed infrared camera which employs
a  cryogenically  cooled  InSb  focal-plane  array  with  320  x  256  pixels.   At  full  resolution,  the
camera is capable of operating at nearly 2000 frames-per-second (FPS). However, during all
LAI experiments the field of view was reduced to 64 x 52 pixels to enable frame rates of 24
kFPS to be used.  This frame rate was required to sufficiently resolve the absorbance spectrum
measured in each pixel when employing the scan rates and amplitudes used here.  A bandpass
filter centered near 2060 cm−1  with a full-width at half-maximum of 40 cm−1  was used to prevent
pixel saturation from background flame emission which was pronounced in the high-temperature
and sooting flame studied here.
Flames were produced by a custom-made coflow burner (see Fig.  1(b)).  The outer body of
the burner is made from a stainless-steel pipe (330 mm long, 19 mm outer diameter) with weld
neck flanges on each end.  A smaller tube (3.2 mm (1/8") outer diameter and 2.16 mm (0.085")
inner diameter) concentric with the outer body of the burner carried a mixture of oxygen and
ethylene to the flame.  Streams of ethylene (0.045 L/min) and oxygen (0.072 L/in) were mixed
≈150 diameters upstream of the burner exit via a mixing T-junction that was connected to 1/4"
diameter gas lines made of 316 stainless steel.  A coflow of air entered the burner orthogonally
through the main outer body 51 mm above the bottom flange.  The air flowed through the annulus
between the body wall and central tube and passed through a 6-cm deep bed of 3-mm diameter
glass beads located 72 mm downstream of the coflow inlet.  The coflow then passed through a
12.7 mm thick honeycomb flow straightener (0.88 mm cell size) at the exit plane to reduce the
turbulence level and lateral velocity components.  The exit of the fuel supply line is flush with the
exit of the honeycomb flow straightener.  To mitigate risk of flashback, the burner was first lit
without coflow and without premixing to establish a pure-ethylene-air diffusion flame.  Once the
diffusion flame was established the flow rate of oxygen was gradually increased until the desired
equivalence ratio was reached.  The C2H4-O2  jet exit velocity and jet Reynolds number were 0.8
m/s and 61.0, respectively.  The coflow velocity was adjusted until the flame appeared steady,
resulting in an approximate exit velocity and Reynolds number of 0.5 m/s and 331.6, respectively.
Figure 1(c) shows the partially premixed (φ=6.43) oxygen-ethylene flame studied here using
LAI. The image shown in Fig.  1(c) was acquired using high dynamic range (HDR) imaging to
highlight flame structure and avoid camera saturation.  This was required due to the extreme
luminosity (too bright to view without eye protection) of this flame.  The HDR images were
acquired using a Nikon D3200 camera with an AF-S Nikkor 18-55 mm lens.  For each HDR
image, 4 photos were taken with varying shutter speeds and then combined with Luminance                                                                        
HDR software to create the final image.  The shutter speed for each image was chosen to be
optimal for a unique region of the flame.
3.    Motivation for optical design
Experiments  were  conducted  without  diffusers  to  illustrate  the  challenges  associated  with
performing  mid-IR  LAI  with  coherent  laser  light.   Without  diffusers,  pronounced  Airy-disk
patterns  were  observed  in  images  of  the  QCL’s  laser  beam  (see  Fig.   2(a)).   These  and  other
diffraction-induced patterns were altered by the presence of the flame and varied in time during
scanned-wavelength  experiments.   For  example,  Fig.   2(b)  illustrates  the  signal  time  history
measured in a single pixel while scanning the wavelength and intensity of the QCL. Pronounced
oscillations  in  signal  intensity  (analogous  to  optical  fringes  formed  by  conventional  etalons)
were found in pixels located in the vicinity of diffraction patterns.  These oscillations severely
complicate in situ determination of the non-absorbing light intensity (Io).  This leads to spatially
dependent errors in the best-fit spectroscopic parameters (e.g., integrated absorbance) obtained
from the spectral-fitting routine, which leads to spatially correlated errors in the measured gas
conditions.  For example, Fig.  2(c) shows a single image of the path-integrated temperature field
(calculated from the two-color ratio of integrated absorbances) that is severely compromised by a
clear Airy-disk pattern in the middle of the flame.
One approach to avoiding these diffraction-induced image artifacts is to destroy the coherence
in the laser light by reflecting the beam off spinning diffusers.  This technique has been used in a
variety of low-speed visible-imaging applications employing laser backlighting [23–25], most
similarly, to perform low-speed (<30 frames per second) imaging of soot-volume-fraction in
flames via 2D imaging of visible (632.8 nm) laser extinction [23].  However, implementing this
strategy into a high-speed scanned-wavelength laser-absorption-spectroscopy technique has, to
our knowledge, never been done previously and this presented several challenges.  Most notably,
high angular velocities (approaching 100,000 RPM) were needed to scramble the speckle pattern
created by the diffusers (see Figs.   3(a) and 3(b)) and sufficiently homogenize the local light
field on the timescale of the short camera integration times required here (order of 10  µs).  For
example, Fig.  3(c) compares single-pixel time histories measured during a scanned-wavelength
experiment with stationary and spinning diffusers.  When the diffusers are stationary the light
field  consists of a  speckle  pattern  (see Fig.   3(a))  and large amplitude,  temporally structured
noise (see Fig.  3(c)) persists in each pixel (albeit with altered characteristics).  The latter likely
originates from wavelength-dependent optical interference.  However, by spinning the diffusers                                                                              
the speckle pattern can be sufficiently homogenized on the timescale of the camera integration
time (see Fig.  3(b)).  This leads to the signal in each pixel consisting of relatively random (i.e.,
unstructured) and lower amplitude noise (see Fig.  3(c)) which is much less problematic for the
spectroscopic fitting routine.  It is worth noting that spinning both diffusers provides only a small
gain in SNR compared to spinning a single diffuser.  However, it was critical to reflect the light
off two diffusers (e.g., 1 stationary, 1 spinning) to achieve an SNR sufficient for 2D LAI in the
flames studied here.   Figure 3(d) illustrates that using a longer camera integration time (tint)
reduces the noise level.  This is because it enables the time-varying speckle pattern to be averaged
over a longer duration.  The measurement of SNR vs integration time was least-squares fit to a
power-law function of the form SNR(tint) = atibnt.  The best-fit values of a and b were 4.82 and
0.51, respectively, and the coefficient of determination (i.e., R2) was 0.999 indicating that the
model captures the effect of integration time on SNR well.  From this analysis, it is clear that
using the highest motor speed and longest integration time possible for a given frame rate is
desirable.
It is important to note that the results shown in Fig.  3 are dependent on the laser wavelength
and diffuser grit size.  Gold-coated ground-glass diffusers with 120, 220, and 1500 grits/inch
were  all  tested.   The  diffusers  with  120  grits/inch  performed  best  (provided  a  diffuse  beam
and dense speckle pattern) when using laser light near 4.8  µm.  Conversely, the diffusers with
1500  grits/inch  performed  best  for  laser  light  near  1.4  µm,  but  performed  poorly  (providing
near-specular reflections with little speckling) for laser light near 4.8  µm.
4.    2D Laser-absorption measurements
4.1.    Validation of LAI diagnostic
The accuracy of the LAI diagnostic was validated by studying a non-reacting, isothermal, laminar
jet  of  49%  CO, 49%  Ar  and  2%  H2  flowing  into  ambient  air.   The  initial  jet diameter  was  2
mm and the exit velocity of the jet was 3.32 m/s, yielding a jet Reynolds number of 217.6.  The
spatial resolution of the LAI diagnostic was estimated by imaging a wire mesh backlit with the
incoherent mid-infrared laser light (see Fig.  4).  The known spacing between wires was used to
determine that the projected pixel size was 140  µm.  In all experiments the camera was focused
onto the central axis of the jet (determined by imaging a wire mesh).  The QCL was scanned
across the P(0,20) transition at 50 Hz and the laser light was imaged at 24 kFPS with a resolution
of 64 x 52 pixels.  The QCL’s current was scanned below the threshold current to enable the
background emission in each pixel to be measured.  The measured background emission was                                                                               
subtracted  from  each  pixel  and  the  baseline  incident  light  intensity  was  then  determined  for
each pixel by least-squares fitting a 3rd-order polynomial to the non-absorbing regions of the
intensity scan.  The absorbance spectrum measured by each pixel (e.g., see Fig.  5(a)) was then
calculated using Beer’s law.  A Voigt profile was least-squares fit to the measured absorbance
spectrum in each pixel with the transition linecenter, integrated absorbance (i.e., integrated area)
and collisional width as free parameters and the Doppler width fixed at the value corresponding
to the known temperature (296 K). With the temperature and pressure known, the integrated
absorbance corresponding to the best-fit Voigt profile was then used to calculate the mole fraction
or column density of CO using Eq.  (1).
Aproj, j  = Sj(T)P χCO L                                               (1)
Here  Aproj, j  [cm−1]  is  the  integrated  absorbance  of  transition   j,  Sj(T)  [cm−2/atm]  is  the
linestrength of transition  j at temperature T, P [atm] is the pressure of the gas,  χCO is the mole
fraction of CO, and L [cm] is the path length through the absorbing gas.  Figure 5(b) shows that
the measured CO mole fraction in the jet core (calculated assuming a constant optical path length
equal to the initial jet diameter) agrees within 3% of the known value (i.e.,  χCO = 0.49) and the
spatial standard deviation in the jet core is 3.1% of the known value.  The image also reveals the
expected structure of a laminar jet, with a near constant mole fraction in the core of the jet and
increasing (in the axial direction) transport of CO into the boundary layer.  Figure 5(c) illustrates
how the measured column density of CO varies across the jet and how it compares to the value
predicted assuming a constant  χCO = 0.49 (i.e., no mixing) and the known initial jet geometry.  At
the jet exit, the measured profile of  χCO L agrees exceptionally well with that predicted assuming
constant  χCO  and  similar  agreement  exists  further  downstream  (y =  4  mm  and  8.5  mm)  in
the middle of the jet (i.e., -0.75 mm < r < 0.75 mm), thereby supporting the accuracy of this
diagnostic.  The 95% confidence interval (obtained from the spectral-fitting routine) of  χCO L
varied between 1% and 3% across the jet.  The radial profiles indicate increasing transport of CO
into the boundary layer and this likely results from a combination of diffusion and laboratory
air  currents,  the  latter  of  which  introduced  an  obvious  asymmetry  in  the  jet  profile  on  other
occasions.
4.2.    Path-integrated measurements of 2D flame structure
2D LAI measurements of path-integrated temperature and CO column density were acquired in
laminar, partially premixed, oxygen-ethylene flames.  Figures 1(b) and 1(c) illustrate the burner
and flame studied, respectively.  The LAI measurements were acquired using a 64 x 52 pixel
window with a frame rate of 24 kFPS and an integration time of 16.4  µs.  Using this exposure
time and a bandpass filter near 2060 cm−1, the flame produced ≈12,000 counts of background
emission, which was measured with the laser off before each scan and then subtracted from each
pixel’s time history prior to calculating the absorbance corresponding to each scan.  Some slight
instabilities in the flame were observed which introduced additional noise in the signal measured
by each pixel.  As a result, multiple scans were averaged together (after background subtraction)
to further improve SNR. Figure 6(a) illustrates how averaging multiple scans together improves
the SNR. Specifically, the scan-averaged SNR improves from 24.7 to 50.4 for 15- and 50-scan
averages,  respectively.   Figure  6(b)  shows  the  corresponding  absorbance  spectrum  (15-scan
average) measured by a single pixel imaging the middle of the flame.  The absorbance spectrum
exhibits a 1-σ absorbance noise level of 0.008.  For each spectrum, the transition lineshapes were
modeled by a Voigt profile and the best-fit spectrum was determined using a least-squares fitting
routine with the transition linecenters, integrated absorbances, and collisional widths as free
parameters.  The Doppler width of each transition was fixed to the value given by the temperature
determined from the two-color ratio of integrated absorbance,  R (given by Eq.  (2)), obtained
from the previous iteration.
Here,  Aproj,P(0,20)  and  Aproj,P(1,14)  are the integrated absorbance of the P(0,20) and P(1,14)
absorption  transitions  determined  by  the  spectral-fitting  routine.   With  R and  spectroscopic
constants known, the path-integrated temperature was determined using Eq.  (3) [26]:
where h [J · s] is Planck’s constant, c [cm/s] is the speed of light, kB [J/K] is the Boltzmann
constant, E′′  [cm−1] is the lower-state energy of a given transition (taken from the HITRAN2012
Database [27]), and To is the reference temperature (296 K). Here subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the
P(1,14) and P(0,20) transitions, respectively.
With the pressure and path-integrated temperature known, the integrated absorbance of the
P(0,20) transition was used to calculate the column density of CO ( χCO L) using Eq.  (1) where the
linestrength of the P(0,20) transition was evaluated at the measured path-integrated temperature
using Eq.  (4).
Here, νo is the transition linecenter frequency [cm−1] and Q is the partition function.  It should
be noted that this approach is strictly valid in the limit that the linestrength of each transition
exhibits a linear dependence on temperature across the range of temperatures that exist along the
line-of-sight [13].
Figures 7(a) and 7(b) show images of path-integrated flame temperature for a 15- and 50-scan
average, respectively, and Figures 7(c) and 7(d) show images of CO column density for a 15-
and 50-scan average, respectively.  The spectral-fitting routine was performed in all pixels where
the peak absorbance on the P(0,20) transition was greater than 0.05,  thereby ignoring pixels
with  an  absorbance  SNR  lower  than  6.25.   The  images  illustrate  that  2D  LAI  is  capable  of
resolving the thermochemical structure of laboratory scale laminar flames.  The images reveal
that the temperature is lowest in the fuel-rich core near the burner exit and increases in both the
radial and axial directions, and peaks near the boundary with the air coflow.  These observations
are  consistent  with  the  expected  structure  of  a  laminar  diffusion  flame.    The  image  of  CO
column density is more difficult to interpret given that the flame diameter increases in the flow
direction.  Regardless, these images illustrate that, in general, the amount of CO present along a
given line-of-sight increases in the flow direction.  All of the images indicate that the flame is
approximately axisymmetric, thereby enabling a tomographic reconstruction to be performed to
provide greater detail regarding the 2D flame structure.
Tomographic reconstruction of 2D flame structure
Figure 8 shows tomographic reconstructions of gas temperature and CO mole fraction in the
flame’s radial plane for a 5-scan (Figs.  8(a) and 8(c)) and 50-scan (Figs.  8(b) and 8(d)) average.
Radial  profiles  of  temperature  and  CO  mole  fraction  are  shown  in  Fig.   8(e)  at  select  axial
locations to further illustrate the thermochemical flame structure.  These results were obtained
by applying the  tomographic reconstruction algorithms  developed by Daun et al.  [28] to  the
path-integrated measurements of integrated absorbance obtained via LAI. These alogrithms have
previously been applied to numerous flame studies [14, 19, 21].  The results shown in Fig.  8 more
clearly reveal the flame structure (compared to path-integrated results) and illustrate temperature
and species profiles that are consistent with that expected in a fuel rich, partially premixed flame.
The temperature is lowest in the core of the flame and, in general, increases in both the axial and
radial directions.  In comparison to the images of path-integrated temperature, the tomographic
reconstruction reveals that the temperature rise in the axial direction within the flame core is
more modest, increasing from 740 K to 1320 K between 1 mm and 9 mm above the burner exit,
respectively.  The temperature is highest (reaching a maximum near 2200 K) near the boundary
between the fuel-rich C2H4/O2  stream and air coflow where oxygen supplied by the coflow can
reach the unburnt fuel and intermediate species.  The reconstructions illustrate that very little CO
is present near the burner exit and that the mole fraction of CO increases significantly in both the
axial and radial directions before falling off in the boundary layer.
The remainder of this section is devoted to describing the pertinent details of the tomographic
reconstructions.  Tomographic reconstructions were performed assuming each pixel images a
unique line-of-sight.  Flame-induced beam steering could cause this assumption to breakdown
and ultimately reduce the spatial resolution of the diagnostic.  Since tomographic reconstruction
is sensitive to noise in the input image, a 2×2-pixel average was applied to all images prior to                                                                                 
averaging 5, or 50 measured spectra together (i.e., prior to performing time averaging).  This
significantly  reduced  the  noise  induced  by  beam  steering  and  the  rotating  diffusers.    Next,
the absorbance spectra were processed using a two-line Voigt fit,  as described previously,  to
determine the integrated absorbance (Aproj) of the P(0,20) and P(1,14) absorption transitions
corresponding to each pixel.  The tomographic reconstruction algorithm employed here relies on
assuming that the flame is axisymmetric.  As a result,  Aproj  only needs to be resolved along the
flame radius.  Since  Aproj  was measured here along both halves of the flame, the results for each
half were simply averaged together, however it should be noted that this has a small effect on
image quality (see Fig.  9).  The image (i.e., matrix) of each transition’s integrated absorbance
was then passed to the tomographic reconstruction algorithm as described next.
The  tomographic  reconstruction  algorithm  requires  the  assumption  that  the  flame  can  be
divided into N concentric rings of thickness Δr with a homogeneously distributed field variable,
k, which is given by Eq.  (5) for a specific absorption transition.
k = Sj(T)P χCO                                                                 (5)
k effectively represents the local integrated absorbance per unit path length and the integral of k
along a line-of-sight represents the back-projected data (i.e., the measured integrated absorbance:
Aproj).  N is given by the number of pixels that resolve the flame radius and Δr is given by the
projected pixel size.                                                                                    
First, a process called onion-peeling deconvolution is used to generate a set of equations of the
form  Ax = b.  Here,  A is the coefficient matrix which contains the path length of light through
each annular section (i.e., the absorbing path length of the line-of-sight imaged by a given pixel)
and is given by Eq.  (6),  x contains the to-be-solved-for field variable (k), and  b contains the
back-projected data (i.e., the integrated absorbance,  Aproj, measured by each pixel).
Solving  this  system  with  back  substitution  may  return  a  solution  that  is  sensitive  to  noise  in
the back-projected data which manifests as errors or noise in the reconstruction of  k.  This is
because onion-peeling deconvolution yields an ill-conditioned coefficient matrix which makes it
difficult to find a well defined global minimum [28].  To overcome this, Tikhonov regularization
is employed to increase the condition of the matrix [28].  In doing so, the equations shown below
are used to provide a more robust solution.
Here, k˜∗  is the field variable that yields the global minimum residual after Tikhonov regularization
(i.e., the solution that is ultimately used to calculate images of gas properties).  For the zeroth
order regularization used for the data presented in this manuscript,  L0  is given by the  N × N
matrix shown in Eq.  (10).
The  parameter  α0  is  called  the  regularization  parameter  and  it  controls  the  balance  between
solution accuracy and smoothness/stability [28].  This works by approximating solutions to the
ill-conditioned set of equations with those of a similar well-conditioned set.  A high value of
α0  will return a solution which is smooth, but less faithful to the original problem, and lower
values return high-fidelity but often oscillatory solutions.  As α0  → 0, k˜∗  →  k∗  where k∗  is the
field variable that yields the true minimum residual.  Although methods exist for determining
an  optimum  value  for  α0  [29],  the  value  is  often  chosen  at  the  user’s  discretion  to  obtain  an
acceptable balance of accuracy and smoothness [28].  Figure 9 illustrates how increasing α0  from
0 to 1 improves image quality but reduces spatial resolution.  In addition, Fig.  9 also illustrates                                                                                    
how averaging both halves of the absorbance data together (prior to reconstruction) and using
a 2x2 pixel average both slightly improve image quality without significantly altering the final
images of  χCO.  The images presented in Fig.  8 were obtained using α0  = 0.1 since this produced
solutions with acceptable stability while preserving the vast majority of flame structure that was
revealed using α0  = 0.
The  solution  for  each  individual  transverse  plane  (i.e.,  row  of  pixels)  was  stable,  however
differences between adjacent planes gave the final 2D images a somewhat noisy appearance.  This
noise was attenuated by applying a 6-point moving average filter along the axial direction of the
2D images of k˜∗  for each absorption transition.  Figure 10 illustrates the row-to-row oscillations
in k˜∗  for both absorption transitions near the flame’s central axis and how the 6-point moving
average is effective at removing the oscillations while preserving flame structure.
After reconstructing the 2D image of k˜∗  for each absorption transition, the two-color ratio of
k˜∗, Rk˜∗ , was calculated using Eq.  (11).
The final 2D image of temperature was obtained by replacing R with Rk˜∗   in Eq.  (3).  Next, the
2D image of  χCO was obtained using Eq.  (5) with k replaced by k˜∗P(0,20)  and using the 2D image
of temperature to calculate the corresponding image of the P(0,20) transition’s linestrength.
The SNR of the measured absorbance for the P(1,14) transition is low in the center of the flame
near the exit of the burner since the gas is relatively cool and little CO is present there.  This
prevented a reliable reconstruction of the 2D temperature field in a 1.7 mm wide region located
0 to 3 mm above the burner exit.  As a result, 224 pixels of the temperature data in this region
were replaced with values extrapolated from a 2nd-order polynomial which was obtained via
least-squares fitting to the remainder of the data set.  A total of 224, or 6.7% of the temperature
image presents a value that was obtained via extrapolation.
Conclusion
This work has demonstrated, for the first time, that mid-infrared LAI is capable of providing 2D
measurements and tomographic reconstructions of flame temperature and carbon monoxide in
axisymmetric flames without mechanical translation of the line-of-sight.  This was achieved by
reflecting scanned-wavelength laser light off two ground-glass diffusers spinning at 90,000 RPM
prior to the light traversing the flame.  This was done to break the coherence in the laser light
and, therefore, prevent the formation of diffraction-induced image artifacts which have limited
previously developed LAI techniques to 1D (simultaneously) imaging.  Ultimately this approach
enabled  measurements  of  CO’s  absorbance  spectra  to  be  acquired  at  50  Hz  across  ≈3,300
lines-of-sight simultaneously.  While additional time averaging of spectra was done to improve
the  final  image  quality,  this  work  demonstrated  that  this  technique  can  provide  high-fidelity
2D measurements and tomographic reconstructions of temperature and CO mole fraction on
near-cm scales with a projected pixel size of 140  µm and a time resolution of 0.1 to 1 seconds.
In comparison to conventional mid-IR LAT techniques employing mechanical translation of the
line-of-sight, this technique offers a reduction in data collection time of ≈1,000× and potential
for a ≈10× gain in spatial resolution compared to LAT methods that are limited by the laser beam
diameter.  In short, the capabilities of this 2D mid-IR LAI technique represent a significant step
towards achieving high-speed, high-resolution measurements of thermochemical flame structure
via LAT.

