The structure of turbulent stratified and premixed methaneairflames I Nton-swirling flows
Abstrac
A series of flames in a turbulent methane/air stratified swirl burner is presented. The degree of stratifi- cation and swirl are systematically varied to generate a matrix of experimental conditions, allowing their separate and combined effects to be investigated. Non-swirling flows are considered in the present paper, and the effects of swirl are considered in a companion paper (Part II). A mean equivalence ratio of ¼ 0:75 is used, with / for the highest level of stratification spanning 0.375–1.125. The burner features a central bluff-body to aid flame stabilization, and the influence of the induced recirculation zone is also considered. The current work focuses on non-swirling flows where two-component particle image veloc￾imetry (PIV) measurements are sufficient to characterize the main features of the flow field. Scalar data obtained from Rayleigh/Raman/CO laser induced fluorescence (CO-LIF) line measurements at 103 lm res￾olution allow the behavior of key combustion species—CH4, CO2, CO, H2, H2O and O2—to be probed within the instantaneous flame front. Simultaneous cross-planar OH-PLIF is used to determine the orientation of the instantaneous flame normal in the scalar measurement window, allowing gradients in temperature and progress variable to be angle corrected to their three dimensional values. The relationship between curvature and flame thickness is investigated using the OH-PLIF images, as well as the effect of stratifi- cation on curvature.
The main findings are that the behavior of the key combustion species in temperature space is well cap￾tured on the mean by laminar flame calculations regardless of the level of stratification. H2 and CO are significant exceptions, both appearing at elevated levels in the stratified flames. Values for surface den￾sity function and by extension thermal scalar dissipation rate are found to be substantially lower than laminar values, as the thickening of the flame due to turbulence dominates the effect of increased strain. These findings hold for both premixed and stratified flames. The current series of flames is proposed as an interesting if challenging set of test cases for existing and emerging turbulent flame models, and data are available on request.
1. Introduction
Practical combustion applications and model combustors designed to study relevant phenomena at atmospheric pressure typically operate in a stratified regime. This stratification may be intentional, giving acceptable flame stability in overall lean combustion, or it may be due to physical design constraints, which impose limits on the mixing length for the fuel and oxidizer. There has been a significant push in the combustion research community to investigate the effect of stratification due to its practical rele￾vance. This section provides a brief overview of the findings in the experimental literature; a more thorough discussion is avail￾able in [9].The effect of stratification on low turbulence, low Reynolds number lean flames has been investigated in a small number of studies. Renou et al. [10] found that stratification in￾creased the flame propagation rate in unsteady flame kernels. Fur￾ther, their work showed that the local variation in burning velocity results in increased flame front wrinkling relative to premixed flames, with a corresponding broadening of curvature distribu￾tions. Pasquier et al. [11] studied the propagation of flames through stratified lean turbulent propane mixtures in a combus￾tion bomb. They found that following ignition, the mean propaga￾tion speed in stratified flames was higher than in corresponding premixed cases with the same mean equivalence ratio ahead of the flame. They attributed this enhancement to the diffusion of heat and radicals from richer products into leaner reactants (i.e., back-supported flame propagation). Robin et al. [12] studied a rod-stabilized stratified flame. Their analysis of instantaneous flame thickness and curvature indicates that the presence of stratification in back-supported lean flames leads to a decrease in flame thickness, due to additional stretch components arising from differential flame propagation speeds. Anselmo-Filho et al. [13] used a low turbulence, rod-stabilized slot burner flame, and found that curvature distributions are broadened, and that the flame sur￾face density is increased relative to the premixed case. A number of recent experimental studies have examined results from novel turbulent stratified burners at more practically relevant turbulence levels [14–18]. Seffrin et al. [14] at Darmstadt intro￾duced an axisymmetric concentric-tube burner with a central pilot flame designed to allow the investigation of flames at moderate Reynolds numbers 104. Laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) and particle image velocimetry were used to characterize the velocity field for a number of operating conditions. The structure of these flames were investigated by Böhm et al. [15] using Rayleigh scattering; the resulting mean and RMS profiles of temperature indicated a higher turbulent burning speed in the pre￾mixed cases relative to the corresponding stratified cases. Examin￾ing instantaneous temperature profiles and corresponding OH-PLIF images, Böhm et al. concluded that the effect of stratification on temperature profiles is secondary to that of the actual three dimen￾sional flame geometry. Additionally they found that curvature dis￾tributions behaved similarly with stratification to those reported by Anselmo-Filho et al. [13]. Vena et al. [18] examined the effects of equivalence ratio gradients on the topology of flame fronts in a turbulent iso-octane/air V-flame. They observed variations in curvature distributions that were less significant than those re￾ported elsewhere in the methane/air literature. Their main conclu￾sion was that gradient effects on curvature may be limited in flames that are stoichiometric on the mean. The present work presents results from a series of non-swirling methane/air flames in a new turbulent swirl burner. This burner was designed to have have an open flame, facilitating high fidelity scalar measurements. The design incorporates a central bluff-body and variable swirl to emulate in part the flow complexity and flame stabilization methods seen in practical systems. These design decisions were also made in the context of providing model test cases progressively more complex and therefore complementary to those of the Darmstadt stratified burner [14,15]; the present burner is similar in that it uses a co-annular design, but imposes additional flow complexity through the inclusion of a bluff-body induced  ecirculation zone and variable swirl levels. Results from the flames surveyed are presented as follows.
The thermal and compositional structure of the flames surveyed are mapped out by radial profiles of the Favre-averaged tempera￾ture and equivalence ratio at a range of axial locations. Maps of mean and fluctuating velocity obtained from PIV measurements are used to characterize the flow field above the burner exit in reacting and non-reacting flows. Near-exit profiles of mean and fluctuating components of radial and axial velocities in non￾reacting conditions are also shown to approximate boundary conditions. Temperature-space plots of major species are then pre￾sented; data are taken from the intersection of the mixing layer (locus of / = 0.5(/i + /o)) and the mean flame brush (locus of peak RMS fluctuation of temperature) to highlight the effects of stratifi- cation on the mean behavior of these quantities. Scalar gradients, in the form of the surface density function and scalar dissipation rate, are shown in progress variable space. The influence of strati- fication on topological quantities such as flame thickness and cur￾vature is also investigated.
2. Experimental details
An overview of the swirl burner, operating conditions, and experimental methods used is provided to give context to the re￾sults presented further on in the present work.
2.1. Cambridge stratified swirl burner
The slot burner investigated by Anselmo-Filho et al. [13] and the present authors [9] provided detailed information on the ef￾fects of stratification in weakly turbulent V-flames as well as a test case suitable for simulation by DNS. It has also attracted interest from RANS modelers [19]. However, the turbulence intensity of the flames surveyed in that burner was much lower (u0 /sL  1) than those in practical combustion systems. A burner with substantially higher flow rates, velocities and tur￾bulence levels than the slot burner was designed to investigate the effect of stratification in a more representative flow. The burner was designed to provide flows with a variable degree of swirl; this was to approximate the flow conditions found in many practical applications, and to introduce a greater degree of complexity to the test case. The swirl assists flame stabilization, as in practical combustors, allowing more extreme stratified conditions to be investigated than would otherwise be possible. The swirl burner is referred to as SwB throughout the present work. The swirl burner is shown in elevation in Fig. B.1; key components are labeled and are referenced in braces, {}, in the following discussion. It consists of two annular channels through which fuel/oxidizer mixtures can flow, and a large (382 mm diameter) co-flow of filtered air to prevent the entrainment of ambient air. Air flow in the co-flow is conditioned in the follow￾ing way. First, it is passed through three perforated disks {M}, the first of which has 3 mm diameter holes with 40% open area, while the subsequent pair has 1.5 mm diameter holes with 25% open area. The flow is then straightened by passing it through a 38.1 mm deep honeycomb section {L} with 3 mm holes and 75% open area. Finally any clustered particles are filtered using two mesh gauzes {K}, the first of which has 1.2 mm square holes and 70% open area, while the second has 1 mm square holes with 40% open area. The annuli are formed by three concentric tubes {E–G}. The exit geometry is shown in Fig. B.2. The innermost tube {G} is termi￾nated in a ceramic cap {J}. This acts as a central bluff body which aids flame stabilization. The use of ceramic material ensures that heat losses to the bluff body are minimized, and the conditions are assumed to be close to adiabatic. Furthermore, the ceramic used is essentially an inert material in comparison to alternatives
such as stainless steel, with the result radical absorption and sur￾face reactions are minimized.
A locating collar {D} is used to ensure that the major axes of the tubes are coincident. The outer tube {E} and inner tube are aligned relative to the middle tube {F} using a set of three 0.6 mm diameter pins arranged at 120. Annular gap widths were uniform to within approximately 0.05 mm. The diameter of the pins was selected as a compromise between structural strength and the desire to mini￾mize disturbance to the flow. The perturbation of the flow was fur￾ther reduced by placing the locating collar 133 mm upstream of the burner exit.
Flow to the inner annulus is supplied via a plenum {A} at the base of the burner, mixing of fuel and oxidizer gases having taken place in feed lines far upstream of the burner. Though the primary purpose of the plenum is to channel flow from the supply lines to the inner annulus, it also breaks up the flow structures in the lines on entrance to the burner. The outer annulus is fed by the middle and upper plenums {B, C} in the burner. If the middle plenum {B} is used in isolation, then the resulting outer annulus flow is axial. A variable degree of swirl can be introduced to the outer flow by passing a percentage of the overall outer annulus flow through upper plenum {C}. Gas from the upper plenum joins the outer annulus through a swirl collar {I}, via a radially symmetric pattern of inlets angled at 30 to the annulus and at 30 to the horizontal. These angled jets induce a tangential component to the axial flow from the middle plenum, generating a swirling flow at the burner mouth. Flow straightening rings {H} are fitted to the inner and outer annulus close to the plenums supplying axial flow. The rings have a number of small through-holes arranged in a radially symmetric pattern, with major axes parallel to those of the annuli. Turbulence is generated by the changes in sectional area as flow passes through the holes, and the pressure drop across them is sufficiently high to ensure uniform flow. The distance between the flow straighteners and the burner exit is a compromise between the need for a long axial length to ensure that turbulence is fully developed, the practical challenges long burner geometries pose for laser diagnostics, and the decay of swirl and turbulence intensity with distance. The development length is over 25 diameters in each annulus, which is sufficient to give well developed turbulent flow at exit for this compact burner geometry. The development length is also short enough to avoid excessive de￾cay of swirl (used in subsequent experiments) before reaching the burner exit. Detailed drawings are available online [20] and the experimental data are available on request.
2.2. Operating conditions
A matrix of operating conditions was created for experiments using the present burner, as shown in Table 1. These conditions were chosen to allow the investigation of flames in premixed and stratified regimes, with or without swirl. Bulk velocities were cho￾sen to maximize the Reynolds numbers in the flows given the physical constraints imposed by the mass flow controllers avail￾able and the maximum throughput of the laboratory air supply. The total power load P varies from 25.8 kW in the premixed cases (split approximately 1:3 between the inner and outer flows), through 21.5 kW in the moderately stratified cases (5:8), to 19.3 kW in the highly stratified cases (11:10). The bulk velocity in the outer annulus, Uo = 18.7 m/s, was set at more than twice the value of the velocity in the inner annulus, Ui = 8.31 m/s, in order to generate substantial levels of shear be￾tween the two flows. Co-flow air was supplied around the outer annulus with a bulk velocity Uco-flow = 0.4 m/s to prevent the entrainment of ambient air. The Reynolds numbers (Re = qUL/l) derived from the bulk velocities and the exit geometry are Rei = 5960 for the inner annulus and Reo = 11,500 for the outer annulus. The stratification ratio, SR, defined as the ratio of the nominal equivalence ratio in the inner annulus to that in the outer, was var￾ied from 1 for premixed cases to 3 for the most stratified cases. The swirl flow ratio, SFR, defined as the ratio of outer annulus flow through the swirl plenum to that through the axial plenum, was varied between 0 for non-swirling flow to 0.4 for very highly swirl￾ing flow. The highly stratified 0.4 swirl flow ratio cases did not stabilize reliably; the high strain at the flame base made the flame
liable to detach and blow off. The SFR = 0.4 cases were not measured during experimental campaigns because of this ten￾dency to blow off. Table 1 also includes the geometric swirl number calculated as the ratio of mean tangential1 velocity to axial velocity, S = Utg/Uz, at the center of the outer annulus. The corresponding flow angles, g, are also tabulated. The value obtained for the higher swirl case (swirl flow ratio of 0.33) indicates that the burner can operate at practically relevant levels of swirl (S P 0.6 [21]). More complete measurements are planned.In the present work results are presented for non-swirling lean cases only: SwB1 (premixed); SwB5 (moderately stratified); and SwB9 (highly stratified). These cases are described as lean because the region of primary interest in the stratified flames is where the mean flame brush, defined as the location of peak temperature fluctuation, crosses the middle of the mixing layer as defined by the location where /g = 0.5(/o + /i) = 0.75. When referring to re￾sults from a case N at a distance of z downstream of the burner exit, the shorthand SwBNz will be used; for example, the premixed lean non-swirling case at z = 30 mm downstream of the burner exit is denoted SwB130.
2.3. Flow control
The gas flows in all experiments were metered using mass flow controllers. In the case of the multi-scalar measurements Section 2.5, the MFCs were calibrated against laminar flow elements to within 1% of reading at the beginning of the measurement campaign. All the controllers used for the velocity characterization were Alicat mass flow controllers, with factory calibration specifying accuracies within ±0.8% of reading and ±0.2% of full scale.
2.4. Velocity characterization
Velocity characterization in the swirl burner was performed using two-dimensional particle image velocimetry (PIV), giving the velocity components in the axial and radial directions. The in￾ner annulus, outer annulus, and co-flow were each seeded with 1 lm calcined aluminum oxide particles. The seeding was adjusted to give similar seed density in each stream. These particles were illuminated using a 7.5 Hz double-pulsed Nd:YAG laser (Litron Nano PIV) operating at 532 nm. The vertical laser sheets had 0.5 mm thickness at the burner centerline. Each pulse was separated by an interval, Dt, of 16 ls. The light scattered by the seed particles was imaged using a CCD camera (LaVision Im￾ager Pro X 4M) fitted with a Nikon AF Micro Nikkor 60 mm lens (f/ 4) and a 50 mm interference filter centered about 532 nm (0.5 nm FWHM). The imaged field was 69.3 mm wide by 69.3 mm tall, with a pixel resolution of 34.1 lm. 
Vectors were calculated using single-pass cross-correlation with a 32  32 window size and 50% overlap. This gives vector field resolution of 0.55 mm. This resolution is too coarse to accurately characterize the thin shear layers near the burner exit, and further PIV measurements are planned. The present PIV measurements re￾veal the main features of the flow field and are essential for inter￾pretation of some features of the scalar results.
2.5. Multi-scalar diagnostics. Multi-scalar laser diagnostics were applied at the Turbulent Combustion Laboratory (Sandia National Laboratories). The diagnostics setup allows for the line measurement of temperature (Rayleigh scattering) and major species (Raman scattering and CO￾LIF) with simultaneous cross planar OH-PLIF. The experimental set￾up is illustrated in Fig. B.3. This setup and the associated methods of data processing have previously been described in [22–25]. Beams from four frequency doubled Nd:YAG lasers were used for Raman and Rayleigh line imaging, yielding a total energy of 1.8 J/pulse in the probe volume. The focus had a diameter of 0.22 mm (1/e2). The beam diameter was 0.24 mm at the ends of the 6 mm length of the measured segment. CO was excited at 230.1 nm (two photons), with the UV laser beam aligned on the same axis as the Nd:YAG laser beams. The line measurement win￾dow is 6.18 mm wide, with a projected binned-pixel spacing of 103 lm, which is larger than the optical resolution of the measure￾ment system. Effective spatial resolution is limited by the beam diameter (depending on flame orientation) and the potential blur￾ring effect of the flame itself (due to variations in the index of refraction relative to the ambient air), which is difficult to quantify. Signal to noise ratios for measurements in the current experiment are detailed in Table 2. The line measurement window was moved radially such that each segment slightly overlapped with the previous one. Three hundred shots were taken for each step in the initial radial scan, and a further 1200 shots were taken at the location were the mean flame brush was found to lie. Substantially larger datasets (5000–30,000 shots) were taken at the intersection of the mean flame brush and the mixing layer using a technique of spatial over￾sampling and wavelet denoising [26], and these data will be the fo￾cus of future work investigating conditional statistics in the flames burveyed. The measurement locations are shown schematically in Fig. B.4. Radial profiles were taken at increments of 10 mm above the burner exit to capture changes in flame structure with axial distance. Simultaneous cross-planar images of OH-PLIF were also taken to allow the determination of the local flame orientation (3D normal vector) and the three-dimensional gradient of the reaction progress variable. Local curvature values were also calcu￾lated from these images. The PLIF investigation windows were 8.06 mm wide by 4.03 mm tall at a projected resolution of 0.048 mm/pixel, centered along the line measurement axis, and oriented at 32 to the vertical. The PLIF sheets were measured to be between 250–300 lm thick (FWHM).
3. Data analysis
A brief synopsis of the data analysis methodologies employed to calculate derived quantities from the experimental measurements is provided for reference.
3.1. Flame front geometry
Flame fronts were extracted from the OH-PLIF images. These images were pre-processed by subtracting an averaged back￾ground frame, correcting for the intensity profile of the laser beam using measurements in products 3 cm above a premixed CH4/air flat flame at near adiabatic conditions, and normalizing between 0 and 1, as in previous studies [9,16,24,27]. A threshold-based methodology was employed to extract sin￾gle-pixel flame fronts from the OH-PLIF images, as in [16]. Flame front tangents at the intersection axis and the angle between the crossed planes were used to extract the three-dimensional flame normal, n, at the line measurement axis [22,23]. The normal was determined by resolving the two-dimensional flame tangents (t1,t2) in each plane from the 2D image coordinate system into the 3D laboratory coordinate system Fig. B.5, and taking their cross product. The normal vector, n, is orientated such that it points from the products into the reactants. The angle h between n and the line measurement axis, x, may be evaluated using the dot product rule. h is used to obtain three-dimensional values of temperature gradi￾ents as described further on. The discrete two-dimensional local curvature, jd, was calcu￾lated using first and second derivatives obtained from third-order polynomial fits to the flame front contours, as in [9]. jd is taken as positive if the flame front is convex towards the reactants.
3.2. Equivalence ratio and mixture fraction
The present work makes use of an equivalence ratio derived from an atomic balance as follows: The equivalence ratio detailed in (1) is the ratio of the demand for oxygen based on the local mass fractions of hydrogen and carbon to the locally available oxygen. This definition of equivalence ratio yields values that are close to those calculated using the scaled Bilger mixture fraction Z [28]:where the subscripts B and s refer to the Bilger definition and the stoi￾chiometric value respectively. Both the equivalence ratio in (1) and the mixture fraction Z (and the derived /B) are conserved from reac￾tants to products across a planar laminar or turbulent premixed flame. However, equivalence ratio and mixture fraction vary within the flame due to effects of differential species diffusion. Furthermore, as reported by Barlow et al. [29], the combination of differential diffusion and bulk transport effects associated with the present bluff-body stabilized burner geometry cause a significant net in￾crease in equivalence ratio across the turbulent flame brush going from reactants to products, especially in the near field of the stabi￾lized flame. Briefly, H2 and H2O diffuse preferentially toward the reactants and are subsequently transported downstream in this highly sheared configuration. Simultaneously, excess CO2 is trapped and accumulated within the recirculation zone. This has implications for the determination of the local gradient of mixture fraction and the conditioning of data on local equivalence ratio, particularly in stratified flames. This issue will be discussed in more detail further on.
3.3. Stratified progress variable
The present work makes use of a thermal progress variable, c(T). In a purely premixed flame this is simply a normalization of the local flame temperature by the maximum temperature at￾tained in the burned products and the temperature of the un￾burned reactants. Errors are introduced if this is applied to a flame in which the equivalence ratio field is varying spatially. Hence, the equilibrium temperature used in the calculation of the thermal progress variable must be allowed to vary with local equivalence ratio:where T(x) is the local temperature, Tu is the temperature in the un￾burned reactants, and Te(/) is the equilibrium flame temperature as
a function of /. This form of thermal progress variable is more suitable than a basic temperature normalization for flames with asignificant degree of stratification.
Progress variables based on reactant mass fraction or other spe￾cies measurements are also feasible, but (3) is preferred due to the superior accuracy and precision of the temperature measurements Table 2 in the present work. It should be noted that (3) results in
values above unity under super-adiabatic conditions. However this is not an issue in the investigated operating conditions.
3.4. Correction of scalar gradients
Differentiation of discrete scalar data using a second order scheme introduces errors in the calculation of gradients which are a function of the experimental resolution, the most notable effect of which is the systematic reduction of peak gradient values. Correc￾tion factors for resolution effects were obtained from high resolu￾tion calculations of laminar flames, and tabulated as a function of / and T for the current experimental resolution, as in [9]. Correction factors obtained may be biased slightly high, as turbulence has been reported to increase flame thickness relative to equivalent laminar cases [30]. The mean magnitude of the correction for peak jrcj in the premixed SwB110 dataset is 6  102 mm 1 , with a maximum correction of 1.1  101 mm 1 (small relative to the peak values of jrcj  1 mm1). The three-dimensional gradient of temperature or progress var￾iable may be obtained from the two-dimensional value along the line measurement axis by dividing these gradients by the cosine of the solid angle h between the flame normal and the line mea￾surement axis as in [22]. The angle-corrected gradient of any scalar w is thus given as dw/dn = (dw/dx)/cosh, h 6 hm. Note that for this correction to be strictly valid, the angle h should be obtained using the same scalar field as the scalar whose gradient is being corrected. It is assumed in the present work that the iso-contours of the OH field will be parallel to those of the tem￾perature field in three-dimensional space. Hence the solid angle h derived from the OH-PLIF measurements can be used to correct temperature or progress variable gradients in the present work. Uncertainties are amplified by the correction as the solid angle increases, imposing limits on the range of angles for which correc￾tions yield sensible results [9,22]. Figure B.6 shows measured values of mean thermal flame thickness dt for the premixed SwB130 case, where dt = (Tmax Tmin)/jrTjmax. The results for the angle correction process show that the mean flame thickness is approximately constant with increasing angle before decreasin apidly for h P 60. A conservative cut-off angle hm = 50 was cho￾sen to minimize the potential for spurious angle-corrected gradi￾ents to influence the results presented, reducing the datasets by approximately 20%. It is possible that some bias is introduced in derived quantities, such as mean flame thickness, by eliminating high-angle realizations.
3.5. Surface density function and scalar dissipation rate
The surface density function, jrcj, and the scalar dissipation rate, vc, are experimentally measurable quantities with great rele￾vance for certain combustion models. The mixture fraction dissipa￾tion rate, vZ, and the cross dissipation rate, vZ,c, are also important quantities, but are not considered further as the mixture fraction gradients are affected by the point to point noise in the mixture fraction data, which is high relative to the temperature data. The scalar dissipation rate for the progress variable is approximated by:where the thermal diffusivity, a, is obtained by interpolating a look￾up table of calculated values in temperature and equivalence ratio. The calculated thermal diffusivity values were taken from un￾strained premixed laminar flame calculations.2
3.6. Error analysis
The uncertainties introduced in the evaluation of the quantities detailed previously are quantified, so as to understand what effects may be due to physical factors, such as flame straining and curva￾ture, and which may be artifacts of the data analysis itself. The pre￾cision of these derived quantities, r, are determined through the application of error propagation in conjunction with the experi￾mental uncertainties listed in Table 2. The equations used are lengthy and so are detailed separately in Appendix A. The resulting uncertainties for the swirl burner data￾sets are listed in Table 3. As data was taken at many heights in the swirl burner, uncertainties are presented at z = 10 mm for the sake of brevity; these values are indicative of the propagated uncertain￾ties at other axial locations.
4. Results and discussion
Presentation and discussion of results are structured as follows. First, the mean and fluctuating velocity fields are shown, along with near-exit profiles. Next, the thermal and compositional evolution of the flames are investigated using radial profiles of Favre-averaged temperature and equivalence ratio at various distances downstream of the burner exit. The influence of stratifi-cation on scalar structure near the intersection of the mixing layer and mean flame brush is considered in detail, including species￾temperature state space, surface density function, and scalar dissi￾pation rate. Finally, turbulent flame thickness and curvature are considered at various downstream distances.
It is important to acknowledge at the beginning of this discus￾sion that it is not possible in this type of complex burner to isolatepremixed and stratified flames in identical flow fields because stratification affects the flow field. Information on the effects of stratification on flame structure may be extracted but not at iden￾tical conditions of shear and turbulence intensity. In the context of comparison with model calculations of these flames the objective should be to demonstrate equivalent accuracy of predictions for both premixed and stratified cases.
4.1. Velocity characterization
Maps of mean and rms velocity are shown in Fig. B.7 for the non-reacting condition and the reacting SwB1, SwB5 and SwB9 conditions (moving from top to bottom). Note that both u0 and U are derived from the same side of the centerline of the experimen￾tal images. Under the assumption of radial symmetry, is shown (mirrored) for r > 0 mm, with white streak lines to high￾light the flow patterns. The assumption of symmetry will be inves￾tigated in the future using full field velocity measurements. The mixing layer and mean flame brush are also plotted to highlight where the flame lies with respect to the flow field. It is worth not￾ing that these do not intersect within the measurement window shown in Fig. B.7. The two-dimensional flow fields, whether reacting or not, are typical of co-annular jet flow with a central bluff body: the peak velocities emerge from the high flow rate annulus, a recirculation zone is formed over the bluff body, and the peak turbulent intensi￾ties coincide with the location of the location of the shear layers.The most significant difference is that the loci of peak U move radi￾ally outwards in the reacting cases due to the expansion of the hot products. This effect is amplified in the stratified cases due to the stratified flames burning through higher equivalence ratios in the inner annulus, which result in hotter products. The values of u0 demonstrate clearly defined shear layers between the recirculation zone, the inner flow, the outer flow, and the co-flow. The breadth and magnitude of these zones indicate that significant turbulent mixing takes place between the streams in all cases. Profiles of Uz and u0 z near the exit of the burner (z = 5 mm) are shown for non-reacting, non-swirling flow in Fig. B.8, correspond￾ing to SwB15, SwB55, and SwB95. Profiles of the radial components of mean and fluctuating velocity are also shown, though these are substantially smaller than the axial components. The exit profiles demonstrate behavior consistent with fully developed channel flow, with peaks in Uz corresponding to flow from the inner and outer annuli. The peak due to the latter is approximately twice that of the inner flow, as expected from the nominal bulk velocities cal￾culated for the annuli. Uz is negative for r < 5 mm, corresponding to the recirculation zone seen in Fig. B.7. The extent and strength of the turbulent shear layers between the inner- and outer-flows and the outer-flow and the co-flow air are shown by u0 z. The measured radial velocity Ur is small in compar￾ison to the axial velocity at z = 5 mm. The radial fluctuations u0 r are similar to their axial counterpart, showing peaks in the shear layers between the inner- and outer-flows and also the outer- and co-flow. Turbulence parameters were calculated near the exit of the bur￾ner (z = 5 mm) at the center of the inner and outer annular gaps using the equations listed in Appendix B from non-reacting measurements. Calculations were also performed at the center of the mixing layer between the annular flows as close to the height at which mean flame brush intersects the mixing layer in reacting flows (z = 50 mm) as the measured data would permit (z = 45 mm). Values of sL and dL from laminar flame calculations at / = 0.75 were used to calculate Da, Ka, and u0 /sL at this location. The values shown in Table 4 indicate that the flames surveyed lie in the thin reaction zone regime on the modified Borghi diagram Fig. B.9. This is cor￾roborated by the absence of broken flame fronts in the OH images.
4.2. Instantaneous flame structure
Instantaneous sample shots of T and / (selected at random) are shown in Fig. B.10, and the corresponding images of OH-PLIF in Fig. B.11 for distances of z = 10 mm and z = 50 mm downstream of the burner exit. The profiles for the premixed case SwB1 are plot￾ted with markers at the experimental resolution (103 lm) to dem￾onstrate the degree to which the diagnostics can probe the
structure of flames within the instantaneous flame brush. The temperature profiles for SwB110, SwB510 and SwB910 resem￾ble error functions, similar to the thermal ramps seen in laminar
flames. The thermal records close to the burner exit show little evi￾dence of turbulence. At this axial location the flames stabilize in the relatively low turbulence region that exists between the inner annulus flow and the recirculation zone Fig. B.7. Additionally, heat release within a shear layer tends to suppress the production of turbulence. Farther downstream shear-generated vortices develop and lead to higher u0 with a wider range of scales, thus the varia￾tion seen in the profiles for z = 50 mm. Records taken farther downstream frequently deviate from these profiles, particularly for the stratified cases, with local peaks and troughs of temperature occurring within the overall thermal ramp, as shown in the top of Fig. B.10 at z = 50 mm. The profiles of equivalence ratio demonstrate an interesting phenomenon at the z = 10 mm location; in all cases the equiva￾lence ratio is suddenly elevated substantially for r < 8 mm, despite the measurement window lying within the rich fuel/oxidizer stream from the inner annulus (no significant mixing with the lea￾ner outer annulus stream has occurred by this downstream loca￾tion). This behavior is examined in detail by Barlow et al. [29] and is attributed to the combined effect of differential species transport and the presence of the recirculation zone, which amplifies the effect of differential diffusion. The behavior observed in the instantaneous profiles is corroborated by the Favre-averaged results presented farther on. Looking farther downstream, at z = 50 mm, the stratified cases demonstrate significant gradients of / within the instantaneous flame front. The OH-PLIF images shown are typical, and demonstrat qualitatively the evolution of the flame topology from relatively smooth near the burner exit (z = 10 mm) to a significantly more con￾voluted state by z = 50 mm. This is shown in a more quantitative fashion by the spread with increasing downstream distance of the probability density functions of curvature shown further on in the present work.
4.3. Favre-averaged structure
Radial profiles of Favre-averaged temperature and equivalence ratio at a range of distances downstream of the burner exit (z = 10, 30, 50, 70 mm) are shown in Fig. B.12. The thermal ramps in eT are almost coincident in the z = 10 mm cases, despite the sub￾stantial differences in / e within the flame brush. The temperature profiles (and thus location of the flame brush) move with stratifi- cation from overlapping the premixed case at z = 10 mm to a substantial separation farther downstream, with the flame for SwB5 stabilizing slightly farther out radially than SwB9. The flame position is a function of the expansion of the hot products and the flame burning rate, which are influenced by the equivalence ratio distribution (and in the case of the burning rate, by the turbulence experienced). The plots of /e show that the central recirculation zone influ￾ences the hydrogen–carbon–oxygen balance significantly (as seen previously in the instantaneous profiles), resulting in elevated equivalence ratio levels in these regions, particularly close to the burner exit. The shear layer between the recirculation zones and the inner annulus flow results in a mixing layer between the ele￾vated and nominal inner annulus equivalence ratios, which gener￾ates non-zero equivalence ratio gradients in the flame brushes for all three cases at z = 10 mm. As noted previously in this paper and examined in detail in [29], the elevated equivalence ratio in the products results from differential species diffusion, the effects of which are amplified by the recirculation zone above the central bluff body. Favre averages and fluctuations of measured scalars at z = 50 mm, are given in Figs. B.13 and B.14. These plots demon￾strate the structural differences in physical space brought about due to stratification of the inlet flows. Data are available in incre￾ments of 10 mm above the burner exit (z = 10, 20,..., 70 mm), but are presented for z = 50 mm as this corresponds to the intersection of the mean flame brush and the mixing layer in the stratified cases (location C in Fig. B.4).
4.4. Extent of stratification
The equivalence ratio in a laminar premixed flame deviates from the nominal value across the thermal ramp of the flame due to the effects of differential diffusion, and similar trends are seen in turbulent premixed and stratified flames. The gradient of equivalence ratio along the line measurement axis therefore exhib￾its large positive and negative values due to differential diffusion, even in premixed cases. It is therefore difficult to isolate gradients in equivalence ratio due to stratification from those due to the dif￾ferential diffusion effect within the instantaneous flame front. An alternative method to quantify the extent of stratification is to consider the change in equivalence ratio, D/, across the thermal ramp in each instantaneous shot. The effect of differential diffusion on equivalence ratio is negligible outside of the thermal ramp and so a sensible measure of the degree of stratification may be ob￾tained. This metric requires the flame to be located such that the entire thermal ramp is contained within the line measurement ，window, resulting in 1–14% of the data being discarded depending on the degree to which the position of the flame front oscillate radially at a given downstream location. Mean and rms values for D/ are listed in Table 5 at the intersection of the mean flame brush and the mixing layer.
The distributions of D/ are shown for various downstream loca￾tions in Fig. B.15. At z = 10 mm the flames are burning through homogenous premixed reactants within the inner annular flow. However, the D/ distributions have non-zero means for all cases. This is due to the elevation of the equivalence ratio in the recircu￾lation zone discussed in the previous section. Interestingly, the moderately stratified distribution has a much lower mean, indicat￾ing that the amplification of differential species diffusion by the recirculation zone mentioned previously is weaker under stoichi￾ometric conditions (/i = 1.0 for SwB5) than in lean (/i = 0.75 for SwB1) or rich (/i = 1.125 for SwB9) conditions. The influence of the recirculation zone on the premixed D/ distributions decreases with increasing axial distance, and the distributions become positively skewed for z > 50 mm due to mix￾ing with the co-flow air. The stratified distributions are similar in width to the premixed distributions near to the burner exit, although the distributions show long tails at z = 30 mm as a fraction of the realizations burn into the mixing layer. The stratified D/ distributions broaden substantially at z = 50 mm relative to the corresponding premixed distribution as the mean stratified flame brushes intersect the mixing layer between the inner and outer ann￾uli flows. The difference between the distributions for SwB5 and SwB9 becomes less pronounced farther downstream (z = 70 mm). This reflects the merging of the two mixing layers and the effect of dilution with co-flowing air on the overall mixing process.
4.5. The thermal evolution of major species
The mean behavior of various species mass fractions can be tracked as a function of local temperature, representative of the ex￾tent of reaction, to identify the influence of stratification on the
flame structure. Figure B.16 provides scatter plots of these species against tem￾perature at z = 50 mm, which marks the intersection of the mixing layer and the mean flame brush for the stratified SwB5 and SwB9 cases, as seen in Section 4.3. The premixed SwB150 case exhibits a degree of mixing with co-flow air; points where the local equiv￾alence ratio was significantly (7.5%) below the mean value at that temperature are not considered in this analysis to ensure the SwB150 dataset can be considered homogeneously premixed. No such conditioning is applied to the corresponding stratified cases. Mean fits and standard deviations are generated by binning the species data in temperature space in steps of 20 K, and the mean values from the premixed SwB150 data are shown by open circles in all plots to facilitate comparisons with the stratified cases. Lam￾inar calculations at the nominal mean equivalence ratio (/ = 0.75) are also shown. Error bars are omitted for clarity as the error of the mean is very small due to the number of points considered within each temperature bin and the already small experimental error percentages Table 2. As such the conditional fluctuation, or stan￾dard deviation, is much more informative in the present work. Note that the experimental data sets are too large to plot all points in a scatter plot; instead 100 points were randomly selected from each temperature bin, and only these are plotted in the scat￾ter plots. In general there is an order of magnitude more points on the reactant and product side than within the thin reaction zone, with the result that a variable percentage of the total data set is shown by these scatter. All data points below the lean flammability limit3 for laminar methane/air flames (/ = 0.47) are plotted in black to highlight any extension of the lean flammability limit by stratifi- cation, as posited elsewhere in the literature on back supported stratified flames [37–39]. The black points are all at temperatures under 1000 K, which suggests that these points have simply been warmed by nearby mixture at higher equivalence ratio that can react fully. Comparing the mean fits in the stratified cases to the mean val￾ues for SwB150 (shown by open circles in the central and right col￾umns), the influence of stratification on the mean thermal evolution of species appears negligible, except for YCO and YH2 at high temperatures. The divergences seen for these species are attributed to the increased mean equivalence ratio in the product regions of the stratified flames. The mean behavior exhibited by the temperature and major species tracks the stoichiometry in all cases.
The calculated mass fractions of CO, O2 and H2O at the nominal equivalence ratio show good agreement with the experimental means in all cases, though the stratified experimental means devi￾ate at high temperatures for due to the increasing equivalence ra￾tio, as noted previously. The agreement is not as good for CO2, which tracks consistently below the experimental averages. The reasons for this are unclear at present, but may also be related to differential diffusion.
4.6. Stratification and scalar gradients
Surface density function, jrcj, thermal scalar dissipation rate, vc, and turbulent flame thickness, dt, all of which are intrinsically dependent on temperature gradients, are considered in this section. These quantities are of particular interest as there is currently little consensus on whether turbulence has a thickening or thinning ef￾fect on flames, which would directly impact both jrcj and vc.
Results from experimental investigations of turbulent flames by O’Young et al. [40] and Chen et al. [41] showed significant thicken￾ing relative to corresponding laminar calculations, and DNS simu￾lations by Sankaran et al. [30] also corroborate this phenomenon. However Soika et al. [42] observed flame thinning in experiments on turbulent flames, and these findings are supported by the numerical simulations performed by Hawkes and Chen [43].
Chakraborty and Klein [44] observed a Lewis number dependence in the behavior of simple-chemistry DNS relative to laminar flame calculations, with peak values of jrcj being lower for Le > 1 (and vice versa). The effects of spatial averaging have been corrected for, as de￾scribed in Section 3, and angle-correction of gradients has been performed to obtain three-dimensional gradients from their pro￾jection on the line measurement axis. Only records where the solid angle between line measurement axis and the three-dimensional flame normal are less than the cut-off angle hc = 50 are considered, as discussed previously in Section 3. Surface density function (top row) and scalar dissipation rate (bottom row) data for the SwB150 (left column), SwB550 (central column) and SwB950 (right column) cases are plotted in progress variable space in Fig. B.17. The format is similar to that used to show the thermal evolution of major species in Fig. B.16, with mean fits and standard deviations of the experimental data ob￾tained by binning in steps of progress variable of 0.05. There is a high degree of scatter in the surface density function data (top) within each bin regardless of the degree of stratification, indicating that the thermal profiles at these locations frequently Appendix B. Turbulence parameters Turbulence parameters were calculated using (B.2)–(B.8). Cant and Mastorakos [46] provide a good explanation of the origin of these equations. The turbulent length scale, Lt, is determined from the autocorrelation coefficient of the instantaneous velocity fluctuations, where the direction of integration dr is in the positive sense of the radial coordinate r used elsewhere in the present work. Note that the kinematic viscosity, m, and laminar flame speed, sL, were calculated using the mean experimental tempera￾ture and equivalence ratio at z = 10 mm as scalar measurements at z = 5 mm are not available.deviate from the ideal error function profile seen in laminar flames.The nature of this deviation is visible in the instantaneous temper￾ature profiles shown in Fig. B.10; local maxima and minima at intermediate temperatures result in a wide range of progress var￾iable gradients at intermediate values of c, leading to the scatter seen in Fig. B.17. The mean surface density function values for the stratified cases are virtually identical to those for the premixed case, and have lower peak values than those from laminar flame calculation.
These results are in agreement with those in [30,40,41], which demonstrated attenuated progress variable gradients on the mean relative to corresponding laminar values. Furthermore, the pdfs of jrcj at c = 0.5 exhibit similar behavior to those in [30], with broad distributions skewed towards lower jrcj values. These results may also be indicative of preferential diffusion of heat relative to mass (Le > 1), as attenuation was observed under such conditions in [44]. The scalar dissipation rate (bottom row) also shows similar mean behavior whether premixed or stratified, albeit with margin￾ally higher peak values for the stratified cases. This is attributed to the thermal diffusivity, which is strongly coupled with equivalence ratio, which is higher on the mean for the stratified cases than for SwB150. The mean surface density function and scalar dissipation rate are significantly lower than the laminar flame calculations at the nominal equivalence ratio; this is assumed to be due to the local peaks and troughs in the temperature (and by extension, progress variable) profiles mentioned previously. jrcj values will vary from high to near-zero values in the vicinity of a local peak or trough, which occur at intermediate values of progress variable. This reduces the mean value of jrcj, leading to the attenuation rel￾ative to calculations seen in Fig. B.17. Figure B.18 shows the probability density functions of flame thickness, defined as [Tb  Tu]/jrTjmax, at various axial distances downstream of the burner exit (z = 10, 30, 50, 70 mm) for the SwB1,SwB5 and SwB9 cases. The distributions for SwB1,SwB5 and SwB9 behave as expected based on the Favre-averaged tempera￾ture profiles seen in Fig. B.12. An inherent drawback to this definition of flame thickness is that it only gives a sensible measure of the thickness of the thermal ramp in cases that resemble a steep error function. As noted previ￾ously, local maxima and minima are common within the instantaneous profiles of temperature in the current burner (see Fig. B.10); these features are not captured by the expression used for the flame thickness, with the result that the thicknesses reported are not necessarily indicative of the physical structure of the flame. As such caution is advised in the interpretation of these results. A more sensible metric may be to determine flame thickness from the physical distance spanned between the start and end of the flame brush in records where the entire flame front has been imaged. However the metric used to generate Fig. B.18 is common in the literature and so is used here for ease of comparison.
4.7. Influence of stratification on curvature
Stratification has been found to broaden the curvature probabil￾ity density function (pdf) relative to that for an equivalent pre￾mixed case in a variety of burner configurations, including freely expanding flame kernels [10] and weakly turbulent V-flames [9,13,16]. However, DNS results from Malkeson et al. [45] in statis￾tically planar flames at levels of u0 /sL between the V-flame cases and the present work have shown no influence of stratification on curvature (under the assumption of a direct negative correlation between curvature and the tangential diffusion component of dis￾placement speed). Curvature distributions from the present burner are plotted in Fig. B.19 for various axial distances downstream of the burner exit, showing the evolution of flame topology for SwB1, SwB5, and SwB9. Data are presented for heights of z = 10, 30, 50, 70 mm only, but similar trends are exhibited for all z locations surveyed. The pdfs are virtually unchanged by the addition of stratification at all heights, in marked contrast to the results seen for weakly turbulent flame configurations. This suggests that the influence of stratifica￾tion on curvature is strongly coupled to the local turbulence parameters, accounting for the contrast with the results for V-flames in weak turbulence [9,10,13,16]. Stratification is expected to have some effect on flame topology due to variation in local flame speed. The implication of the present results is that this effect diminishes as turbulent intensity in￾creases. Despite the moderate turbulence levels (u0/SL) in the pres￾ent experiments there are no significant difference in curvature pdfs between the premixed and stratified cases. This uggests that the effect of stratification on curvature at the higher turbulence levels seen in practical combustion applications may be minimal within the range of stratification considered here.
5. Conclusions 
A double annular, bluff-body burner was developed in order to systematically investigate effects of fuel–air stratification on flame structure in a turbulent flow field having features relevant to prac￾tical combustion applications. Velocity and scalar results were presented for three non-swirling cases, homogeneously premixed (/i = /o = 0.75), moderately stratified (/i = 1.0,/o = 0.5), and highly stratified (/i = 1.125,/o = 0.375), each operated at the same inlet flow rates. Axial and radial flow fields were revealed using two dimensional PIV, while the thermo-chemical structure was probed within the flame front using Rayleigh/Raman/CO-LIF line measure￾ments with simultaneous cross-planar OH-PLIF. The main conclu￾sions are as follows: (i) The flames surveyed fall within the thin reaction zone regime on the modified Borghi diagram. (ii) Significant levels of stratification are achieved within the flame front. For example, the mean change in / across the thermal ramp in the highly stratified SwB950 case is D/ ¼ 0:17 at the intersection of the mean flame brush and the mixing layer. (iii) Favre averaged results reveal elevated equivalence ratio levels within the recirculation zone for the premixed case. This is attributed to the combined effects of preferential transport of hydrogen away from the flame front near to the burner exit and the accumulation of CO2 within the recirculation zone, which increases the calculated equiva￾lence ratio based on the main species. (iv) The mean behavior of H2O, O2 and CH4 at the intersection of the mixing layer with the mean flame brush is well captured in temperature space by unstrained laminar flame calcula￾tions at the nominal equivalence ratio. Significant differ￾ences are seen in H2, CO, and to a lesser extent CO2 relative to calculations. (v) The mean thermal evolution of all species surveyed is independent of stratification for much of temperature space (T < 1700 K) at z = 50 mm (the intersection of the mean flame brush and mixing layer for the stratified cases). Large deviations are seen for CO and H2 above this temperature, and are attributed to higher mean equivalence ratio in stratified cases near the products. Surface density function and scalar dissipation rate show negligible stratification dependence at these locations, and are significantly attenu￾ated relative to corresponding laminar unstrained values due to the effects of local peaks and troughs within the instantaneous thermal ramp. (vi) Curvature in the current burner shows no stratification dependence at any surveyed height downstream of the burner exit, indicating that the changes with downstream distance exhibited by the pdfs of curvature are dominated by the turbulence field. This is likely to hold at higher turbu￾lence intensities characteristic of practical combustion systems. Future work will address the effects of swirl on flame structure and will further examine the region of intersec ion of the stratified mixing layer and the mean flame brush by multiply conditioning larger datasets.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the EPSRC, the Leverhulme Trust, and Rolls Royce for their financial contributions to this work. Work at Sandia was supported by the United States Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical. Sciences, Geosciences and Biosciences. Sandia National Laborato￾ries is a multiprogram laboratory operated by Sandia Corpora￾tion, a Lockheed Martin Company, for the United States. Department of Energy under contract DE-AC04-94-AL85000. The authors also thank Bob Harmon for his contributions to the experiments.
Appendix A. Error propagation formulas.
The precision in the equilibrium temperature conditioned on local equivalence ratio, T(/) is given by:
For the progress variable, c:
For the thermal diffusivity conditioned on local temperature and equivalence ratio, ac(T,/):
For the gradient of c it is necessary to consider the temperature and equivalence ratio to be independent variables at the local point k, the preceding point k  1 and the subsequent point k + 1:
Similar considerations apply to the uncertainties in thermal scalar dissipation rate, vc:
Appendix B. Turbulence parameters 
Turbulence parameters were calculated using (B.2)–(B.8). Cant and Mastorakos [46] provide a good explanation of the origin of these equations. The turbulent length scale, Lt, is determined from the autocorrelation coefficient of the instantaneous velocity fluctuations, where the direction of integration dr is in the positive sense of the radial coordinate r used elsewhere in the present work. Note that the kinematic viscosity, m, and laminar flamespeed, sL, were calculated using the mean experimental tempera￾ture and equivalence ratio at z = 10 mm as scalar measurementsat z = 5 mm are not available.
where I is the turbulence intensity, Lt is the turbulent length scale, gK is the Kolmogorov length scale, mK is the Kolmogorov velocity scale, sK is the Kolmogorov time scale, and all other symbols have their usual meanings.









