High-pressure,  high-temperature  optical  cell  for  mid-infrared spectroscopy 
Abstract 
The design, characterization, and operation of a new high-temperature, high-pressure optical cell for in- 
frared spectroscopy is presented. The optical cell uses 16 cm CaF 2 window rods to penetrate the tem- 
perature gradient between the heated optical path length and the ambient conditions surrounding the 
system. Along the 21.3 cm optical path length, good temperature uniformity was measured with devia- 
tions being less than 2.4% of the mean absolute temperature. Further characterization of the optical cell 
revealed usable transmission up to ∼8 μm and pressure stability from vacuum to over 30 atm. More- 
over, stable operation of the optical cell during simultaneous heating and pressurization to 800 K and 
over 30 atm was demonstrated. To illustrate the utility of the new facility, high-resolution measurements 
of the R-branch in the fundamental absorption band of nitric oxide near 5.2 μm were collected at several 
pressures (1-34 atm) and temperatures (294–802 K) using an external cavity quantum cascade laser. The 
measured spectra were compared with Voigt line shape simulations using the HITRAN/HITEMP databases. 
At high gas densities, deviations from the Voigt line shape model are observed, emphasizing the need to 
further study infrared molecular spectra at high temperatures and pressures. 
1. Introduction 
Laboratory  measurements  of  high-pressure,  high-temperature 
molecular  spectra  are  desirable  for  their  utility  in  combustion 
sensors  [1] ,  planetary  atmospheric  study  [2–4] ,  predicting  ra- 
diative  heat  transfer,  chemical  sensing  in  industrial  processes 
[5,6] , and sensing for other gas phase systems [7–9] . To that end, 
high-pressure (5–100 atm)  and  high-temperature (650–2500 K) 
spectroscopy has been performed in short-duration ( ∼ms) shock 
tube experiments [8,10–12] . In these experiments, typically only a 
few wavelength regions are studied at a time as traditional wide 
spectrum devices (e.g. FTIR) cannot complete a measurement in 
this time frame. Resolving full absorption bands or branches in 
conditions generated behind reflected shock waves in shock tube 
experiments  has  proven  difficult  until  a  recent  demonstration 
by  Strand  et  al.  using  a  new  rapid-tuning,  broad-scan  ECQCL 
measured  the  absorption  cross  sections  of  ethylene  and  other 
molecules in the 8.5–11.7 μm region [13] . 
The  spectroscopy  literature  contains  numerous  descriptions 
of spectroscopic cells whose achievable temperature or pressure 
conditions  overlap  with  the  range  of  conditions  achieved  in 
shock  tube  experiments.  However,  simultaneously  heated  and 
pressurized spectroscopic cells are relatively rare in the literature, 
particularly in the mid-infrared (IR) region beyond 5 μm. Adding 
this capability yields a more convenient, repeatable, and econom- 
ical  means  to  measure  new  spectra,  test  current  spectroscopic 
models and databases, and to calibrate sophisticated tunable diode 
laser absorption spectroscopy (TDLAS) sensors. 
In  this  paper,  we  present  the  design  and  construction  of  a 
high-pressure, high-temperature optical cell (HPHT) designed for 
mid-infrared spectroscopy via unique calcium fluoride (CaF 2 ) win- 
dow rods. The maximum operating conditions successfully demon- 
strated by the HPHT were simultaneous heating and pressurization 
to 800 K and over 30 atmospheres. Furthermore, the temperature 
non-uniformity of the cell is shown to be no greater than 2.4% 
of the mean absolute temperature across the entire path length, 
and the leak rate is insignificant in comparison to the data col- 
lection time of a typical TDLAS system. To demonstrate and vali- 
date the reported conditions, high-pressure and high-temperature 
laser absorption spectra of nitric oxide (NO) measured in the HPHT 
optical cell are presented and compared to simulations calculated 
from the HITRAN [14] and HITEMP [15] databases. Evidence of col- 
lisional effects beyond Lorentzian-type broadening are observed at 
sufficiently high gas densities. These effects further emphasize the 
need for facilities to perform high-temperature and high-pressure 
spectroscopic experiments. 
2. Absorption spectroscopy fundamentals 
Laser absorption spectroscopy (LAS) is a well-known technique 
used to study molecular structure, and it is also utilized in sensors 
to  measure  the  concentration  of  particular  gaseous  species  as 
well as their temperature, pressure, and even bulk velocity for 
applications in combustion, propulsion, and hypersonics [1,16] . The 
main advantages of LAS are its relatively simple operation in its 
most basic form and its versatility especially in advanced variants 
such as wavelength modulation spectroscopy (WMS) [10–12,17] . 
The IR wavelength regions are of particular interest because un- 
known molecules can be identified from absorption at different 
wavelengths correlating to the bonds and functional groups of the 
molecules. Furthermore, the strong fundamental absorption bands 
of common combustion species (H 2 O, CO 2 , and CO) are found in 
the mid-IR and are becoming increasingly utilized in sensor de- 
signs as mid-IR light sources and optics continue to improve [16] . 
The absorption of monochromatic light is defined by the Beer–
Lambert Law [18] 
which relates the ratio of transmitted to incident light,  II 0 , the 
spectral absorbance, αν, which is the product of the spectral ab- 
sorption coefficient at frequency ν, k ν, and the path length of the 
absorbing medium, L . For an isolated absorption transition, j , the 
spectral absorption coefficient can be further defined                                   
where S is the line strength of the isolated transition, φ is the line 
shape function of the isolated transition, T is the absolute temper- 
ature, P is the absolute pressure, and X i is the mole fraction of the 
absorbing species i . The line shape is often described by the Voigt 
line shape function, which is the convolution of Gaussian ( φD ) and 
Lorentzian ( φL ) line shapes. 
The Gaussian line shape is a manifestation of the velocity distribu- 
tion of the absorbing molecules and their associated distribution 
of Doppler shifts, also known as Doppler broadening. Lorentzian 
line shapes are manifestations of lifetime broadening of energy 
states of the absorption transition; examples are natural broaden- 
ing which is the result of spontaneous emission from the upper 
and lower states of the transition and collision broadening which 
alters the lifetime of a molecule in an energy state via energy ex- 
changes during collisions with other molecules. In many situations, 
Doppler and collision broadening dominate the line shape, neces- 
sitating proper modeling of these two broadening mechanisms for 
use in LAS-based sensors. 
The Doppler broadening line shape can be determined ana- 
lytically from the vacuum frequency of the absorbing transition, 
the molecular weight of the absorbing molecule, and the absolute 
temperature. The collision broadening line shape depends on the 
collision partners present in the gas mixture, the pressure, and the 
temperature. These dependencies are summed up in Eqs. (4) and 
where νC is the collision broadening full width at half maximum 
(FWHM), γB −A is the pressure broadening coefficient of absorbing 
molecule B with collision partner A, T 0 is the reference tempera- 
ture (typically 296 K or 10 0 0 K for high-temperature applications), 
and n is the temperature dependence exponent. While analytical 
collision models exist, 2 γ  and n are usually determined empir- 
ically for each absorbing molecule and collision partner. In fact, 
determination of these collision parameters for different absorbing 
molecules over a range of conditions is a primary motivator for 
the development of the HPHT. 
The  previous  discussion  on  fundamental  absorption  spec- 
troscopy  of  isolated  transitions  is  necessary  to  understand 
collisional  effects  on  molecular  spectra.  As  pressure  increases, 
typically νC follows. At moderate pressures, isolated transitions 
begin overlapping, and typically a superposition of transition line 
shapes sufficiently describes the observed spectrum. As a result, 
a summation over all transitions must be added to the definition 
presented in Eq. (2) . 
At yet higher pressures, the spectrum loses its discrete nature in 
favor of a continuum. Thus, TDLAS sensors designed to operate 
at  high  pressures  require  accurate  knowledge  of  the  spectral 
parameters for all transitions with significant contributions to the 
absorption coefficient at the sensor’s optical frequency. However, 
additional collision effects such as line mixing and the breakdown 
of the impact approximation bring complications beyond the Voigt 
profile and can introduce significant errors between measured and 
simulated absorbance in both the peaks and wings of individual 
transitions and the entire band [17,19,20] . Facilities such as the 
high-pressure,  high-temperature  optical  cell  described  here  are 
essential to better understand these phenomena as a function of 
various thermodynamic conditions. 
3. Previous experimental facilities and studies 
A  number  of  experimental  facilities  have  been  reported  for 
the study of high-pressure and/or high-temperature spectroscopy 
of  various  gaseous  species.  For  the  purposes  of  improving  the 
knowledge of NO radiation transport, Green and Tien performed 
measurements of low-resolution NO spectra in a static cell capable 
of reaching temperatures up to 1200 K and pressures up to 4 atm 
[21] . The cell body was constructed of a zirconia ceramic tube 
placed in a high-temperature furnace, and the windows protruded 
to the more uniform central zone of the furnace via nitrogen- 
cooled  stainless  steel  tubes  mounted  with  sapphire  windows. 
Temperature uniformity was found to be acceptable as the tem- 
peratures measured at the nitrogen-cooled windows and 1.5 cm 
from the windows were 20% and 4% lower, respectively, than the 
center temperature of the furnace [22] . 
Motivated  by  TDLAS  sensor  development  for  high-pressure 
combustion, Reiker et al. studied high-pressure, high-temperature 
water vapor spectroscopy near 7204 and 7435 cm −1 in a static 
cell that demonstrated operation up to 30 atm at 700 K [17] . The 
window design used a tapered window housing mounted with a 
matching tapered sapphire window that was compressed between 
two copper seals by a compression nut. The entire cell was placed 
in a uniform single-zone furnace, requiring the window seal to 
survive all operating pressures and temperatures. The Inconel body 
of the optical cell presented in this paper is similar to Reiker’s cell 
body except with modifications made for the new window design. 
More recently, Stefani et al. studied the spectrum of CO 2 from 
60 0 0 to 10,0 0 0 cm −1 (1–1.67 μm) at pressures and temperatures 
up to 20 atm and 560 K, respectively [23] . The reported con- 
ditions were obtained in a commercial stainless steel (316) op- 
tical cell capable of withstanding pressures up to 200 bar and 
temperatures  up  to  650  K.  The  2  cm  optical  path  length  cell 
used zinc sulfide (ZnS) windows which have good transmission up 
to 12 μm. 
Another example of sapphire’s utilization for high-temperature, 
high-pressure  spectroscopy  was  reported  by  Christiansen  et  al. 
who built and demonstrated an optical cell whose operation range 
reached  simultaneous  heating  to  10 0 0  K  and  pressurization  to 
100 atm [24] . The cell body was made of concentric, high-grade 
aluminum oxide ceramic tubes, and the 3 mm thin sapphire win- 
dows were glass-bonded to the internal ceramic tubes to form a 
seal. A central heating coil heated the 3 cm optical path length 
and was supplemented by two more heating coils on either side 
to form a highly uniform path length. 
A high-temperature, low pressure static cell with excellent tem- 
perature uniformity at 1723 K was reported by Melin and Sanders 
with sample high-temperature spectra of water vapor presented 
[25] . This particular architecture also used concentric alumina ce- 
ramic tubes to form the cell body. The windows were made from 
sapphire tubes  with optically contacted sapphire windows that 
formed a seal on the process side. The optical path length of this 
cell was reported to be changeable, but for the demonstration pre- 
sented a path length of 16 cm was used. 
In many of the designs, penetration across the temperature gra- 
dient from ambient temperatures to the uniform, high-temperature 
zone was achieved, in one way or another, by mounting optical 
windows to the end of a window mount that protrudes into the 
center zone of a high-temperature furnace. For the applications 
discussed, sapphire’s high strength and resistance to thermal stress 
makes it the best solution. However, a limitation of sapphire is 
that its usable transmission range is limited to ∼ 6 μm (depending 
on  the  thickness),  and  to  complicate  matters  the  transmission 
cut-off wavelength  of  sapphire  shortens  as  its  temperature  in- 
creases  [26] .  This limits the number of species and conditions 
available  for  spectroscopic  investigation,  particularly  for  hydro- 
carbons and even NO if the window is too thick. Other window 
materials with longer transmission like ZnS, ZnSe, and the fluoride 
crystals (CaF 2 , BaF 2 , MgF 2 ) have their own design challenges (e.g. 
brittleness, thermal stress, lower maximum temperature stability), 
but  are  necessary  to  extend  the  transmission  range  of  static 
cells. 
The pressures reached by the optical cells described in this 
section  are  representative  of  combustion  engine  pressures,  yet 
there is a drive to reach higher temperatures and longer wave- 
lengths. The need for spectroscopic studies at higher temperatures 
is clear in that combustion temperatures can easily exceed 20 0 0 K. 
The  need  for  measurements  of  high-temperature  and  pressure 
spectra  at  longer  wavelengths  is  evident  in  pyrolysis  kinetics. 
Recent combustion kinetics studies indicate that fuel fragments 
from  pyrolysis  have  a  pronounced  effect  on  oxidation  kinetics 
[27] . Beyond the C –H stretch near 3 μm, a number of hydrocarbon 
(i.e. fuel fragment) identifiers are present in the mid to far-IR. 
Accurate spectroscopic databases of pyrolysis fuel fragments can 
improve time-resolved species measurements during pyrolysis and 
combustion processes. Such measurements significantly improve 
combustion models. In addition to combustion applications, mea- 
surements of the mid-IR spectra of many molecules over a variety 
of conditions up to 40 0 0 K and 10 0 bar are of interest for the study 
of exoplanetary atmospheres [2] . The present optical cell provides 
a  stable  environment  to  study  the  spectra  of  many  molecules 
up  to  ∼8  μm  in  a  wide  range  of  relevant  thermodynamic 
conditions. 
4. Design of the high-pressure, high-temperature optical cell 
The high-pressure, high-temperature (HPHT) optical cell was 
initially designed for infrared spectroscopy of gases at high pres- 
sures  and  temperatures  up  to  900  K.  In  previous  works,  such 
conditions were reached using shock tube or static cell facilities 
with windows made with robust optical materials such as sapphire 
or  fused  quartz.  The  diminishing  transmission  of  longer  wave- 
length light through these materials is problematic for infrared 
spectroscopy  as  sapphire’s  transmission  begins  to  cut  off near 
4.5  μm  and  fused  quartz’s  near  3.5  μm.  Infrared  spectroscopy 
at  longer  wavelengths  requires  use  of  window  materials  with 
superior  transmission  properties.  At  room  temperature,  use  of 
materials such as zinc selenide, calcium fluoride, barium fluoride, 
or germanium for infrared optics is common. Unfortunately, many 
of  these  infrared  optical  materials  are  much  less  robust  than 
sapphire or fused quartz and are more susceptible to a variety 
of failure modes at elevated temperatures such as thermal shock, 
oxidation, and opacity [28–30] . Although a compromise in trans- 
mission wavelength range (up to  ∼8 μm) compared to other IR 
materials, calcium fluoride (CaF 2 ) presents a stable alternative at 
high-temperatures when care is used to prevent damage due to 
thermal stress or exposure to moisture [29,30] . Additionally, CaF 2 ’s 
low index of refraction mitigates back-reflection problems other 
high index materials may cause. Thus, CaF 2 was selected as the 
window material for the HPHT. 
The body of the HPHT is made from Inconel 625 high-pressure 
fittings (High Pressure Equipment Co.); its geometry and dimen- 
sions are shown in Figs. 1 and 2 . SAE ports were machined into 
the boss fittings at either end of the HPHT and are where the 
window  assembly  and  o-ring  sit  to  form  a  vacuum  tight  seal. 
Inlet and outlet tubes at opposite end of the optical cell provide 
flexibility in setting up a flow configuration. The HPHT body sits 
in a 40 cm wide single-zone tube furnace (Barnstead|Thermolyne 
21100 Tube Furnace) that provides the primary heating load and 
insulation.  Additional  high-temperature  insulation  is  added  to 
cover the exposed ends of the metal body. Before being placed in 
the tube furnace, the HPHT was fitted with a stainless steel sheath 
that is used to translate a long K-type thermocouple along the 
HPHT to measure the temperature at different points along the op- 
tical axis. In this configuration, the HPHT temperature distribution 
was found to be unacceptably non-uniform for spectroscopy mea- 
surements (see Fig. 3 ). To overcome the non-uniform path length, 
high-temperature  band  heaters  (Watlow)  were  secured  around 
the center tube of the cell body (see Fig. 1 ). Independent control 
was provided by temperature controllers (Omega CN7533) with 
feedback from type-K thermocouples placed at the band heater 
locations. Fig. 3 shows the improved temperature uniformity of 
the HPHT with the band heaters. 
The  window  design  consists  of  three  components;  namely, 
the window housing, the window, and the sealing adhesive. To 
minimize coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) mismatch with 
CaF 2 , aluminum SAE plugs were selected for the threaded window 
housings that mated with the SAE ports on the cell body. The 
plugs  were  given  a  clear  aperture  of  1  cm  for  optical  access. 
Although the band heaters dramatically improved the uniformity 
of a 22 cm region in the center of the furnace, a large temperature 
gradient exists between the band heater and the window housing 
locations.  To  penetrate  the  temperature  gradient,  16  cm  long, 
1.168 cm diameter CaF 2 rods are used as the window material, 
creating a gas path length of 21.3 cm between the internal faces 
of the CaF 2 rods. The internal faces of the CaF 2 rods are wedged 
to 1 ◦  to mitigate etalons due to constructive and deconstructive 
interference of the laser beam intensity. Two adhesive materials 
were examined to bond the CaF 2 rods to the aluminum window 
housings.  A  high-temperature  epoxy  selected  for  its  close  CTE 
match with CaF 2  and aluminum proved to be unsuitable as it 
cured  significantly  harder  and  stronger  than  the  CaF 2  crystal. 
After curing and upon installation into the HPHT cell, the CaF 2 
rod  fractured  near  the  bonding  location  when  applying  torque 
to  the  SAE  window  fitting.  A  successful  alternative  was  found 
in  a  low-outgassing  silicone  adhesive  (ACC  Adhesives  AS1724) 
with a maximum working temperature of 200 ◦C. Despite a larger 
difference  in  CTE  compared  to  CaF 2 ,  the  softer,  more  elastic 
silicone adhesive has continued to seal under many heating and 
pressurization cycles. To further combat thermal stress at the bond 
location, the boss ends of the HPHT were cooled by water-chilled 
copper coil collars (see Fig. 1 ). With the HPHT temperature set to 
900 K, the temperature at the bond location was measured to be 
less than 80 ◦C, well within the adhesive’s limits. 
5. Characteristics of the HPHT cell 
5.1. Transmission 
Depending on the sample thickness and data source, the re- 
ported optical transmission of CaF 2 crosses 10% between roughly 
8–13 μm (900–1250 cm −1 ) [28,31] . Since the CaF 2 rods used for 
the HPHT are much longer than the specimens typically measured 
in the literature, the authors felt it was worthwhile to measure 
the transmission spectrum to better understand the limits of the 
facility and to plan future experiments. The transmission spec- 
trum of a 12 cm long CaF 2 rod from the same manufacturer of 
the 16 cm long rods used in the HPHT was measured at room- 
temperature with a Nicolet 6700 FTIR spectrometer. The measured 
spectrum is shown in Fig. 4 from 2.5 to 8.3 μm with transmission 
above 90% over much of the measured range until the transmission 
transitions to 10% between 6 and 8 μm. Theoretical transmission 
through the rod was calculated from the Fresnel equations and 
the wavelength-dependent index of refraction and absorption co- 
efficient of CaF 2 [32] . The theoretical simulation, plotted in Fig. 4 , 
agrees with measurements at all measured wavelengths. 
With increasing temperature, the transmission edge of many 
infrared  optical  materials  becomes  shorter  [26,28] .  CaF 2  is  no 
exception  and  its  infrared  transmission  edge  has  been  studied 
from cryogenic temperatures to the elevated temperatures rele- 
vant here [31,33,34] . Namjoshi et al. and Lipson et al. measured 
the absorption coefficient of CaF 2 and other fluoride crystals at 
temperatures between 295 and 800 K and found the temperature 
dependence of the absorption coefficient in the infrared transmis- 
sion edge to be described by a multiphonon absorption process. 
During elevated temperature operation, the temperature gradient 
across the window rods would limit the useful transmission range 
of  the  HPHT  cell  to  ∼6.5–7  μm.  Additional  transmission  data 
found in studies of the contamination of fluoride crystals after 
heat treatment in oxidative and wet environments suggest great 
care must be taken to limit the exposure to moisture and ox- 
idative environments when performing experiments above 600 ◦C 
[29,30,32] . Furthermore, published thermal dispersion coefficients 
for  CaF 2  indicate  the  index  of  refraction  exhibits  little  change 
with temperature ( d n/d T ∼ −10 −5 C1  ) [35] . Thus, the temperature 
gradient  across  the  window  rods  during  elevated  temperature 
operation of the HPHT is not expected to significantly alter the 
refractive properties observed at room temperature. 
5.2. Path length 
The  path  length  of  the  HPHT  cell  was  calculated  to  be 
21.3 cm based on the precisely measured geometry of the various 
components used in the cell’s construction. Additionally, room- 
temperature absorption measurements of NO at known pressure 
and concentration confirmed the path length to within 2% (See 
Fig. 7 (a)). Since the cell is a metal body, changes in path length 
due to thermal expansion must be considered. At the maximum 
operating condition, the change in path length due to thermal 
expansion  was  estimated  to  be  less  than  1%  of  the  nominal 
length due to most of the expansion of the Inconel metal body 
(CTE = ∼ 14 × 10 −6 1/m) being countered by the expansion of the 
CaF 2 rods (CTE = ∼ 20 × 10 −6 1/m). 
5.3. Temperature uniformity 
To measure the HPHT cell’s temperature distribution along the 
optical path length, a type-K thermocouple with 1 cm graduations 
was translated through the stainless steel thermocouple sheath. 
The temperature measurements of the outer wall is equal to the 
inner gas temperature as shown in the analysis of a similar gas cell 
by Schwarm et al. [36] . The measured temperature distributions 
at different conditions are shown in Fig. 3 . Without supplemen- 
tary heating from the band heaters, the heat load supplied by 
the single-zone furnace provided only a short region of uniform 
temperature ( ∼5 cm). Furthermore, the inherent distribution of 
the furnace was found to be biased to one side. To improve and 
optimize  the  temperature  uniformity,  the  band  heater  settings 
were  iteratively  adjusted  until  the  results  were  satisfactory.  A 
22  cm  region  bounding  the  21.3  cm  optical  path  length  was 
measured  at  1  cm  increments  for  each  of  the  profiles  shown. 
At 802 K, the temperature profile saw a maximum deviation of 
19 K or 2.37% from the mean. However, this maximum deviation 
represents only a small fraction of the total path length. Perhaps 
a more indicative metric of the temperature uncertainty along the 
path length would be a standard deviation which is less than 1% 
for each condition shown. 
5.4. Pressure stability 
Pressure  transducers  (Setra)  rated  to  67  and  1.7  atm  were 
used to measure pressures above and below 1.7 atm, respectively. 
Pressure loss was evaluated at different temperature and pressure 
conditions. However, no significant change in leak rate was ob- 
served at elevated temperatures. Under vacuum conditions, the 
pressure was found to be very stable at all temperatures with a 
pressure change of 1 mTorr/s which is negligible for the duration 
of  a  TDLAS  measurement.  At  pressures  above  1  atm,  the  rate 
of pressure change per minute was on the order of 0.01% of the 
nominal pressure. For instance, the drop in pressure at 30 atm was 
observed to be < 0.02 atm after two minutes at any temperature 
condition. During the measurements discussed in the following 
sections, the resolution of the 67 atm pressure transducer could 
not resolve any pressure changes throughout the duration of the 
external cavity quantum cascade laser measurement that lasted 
roughly 6 seconds. Thus, the pressure stability was found to be 
adequate for high-pressure spectroscopy.  
6. Experimental setup and procedure 
6.1. Gas system 
The HPHT was connected to a high-pressure valve manifold that 
controls the flow of gases to the HPHT facility, room-temperature 
reference  cell,  gas  cylinders,  mixing  tank,  vacuum  pump,  and 
exhaust ventilation. At several strategic locations in the manifold 
matrix, pressure transducers monitor the system pressure. Before 
making a measurement, the desired gas mixture of dilute nitric 
oxide in nitrogen was allowed to slowly flow through both optical 
cells for several minutes to allow saturation of NO wall adsorption. 
Next,  the  room-temperature  reference  cell  was  filled  with  the 
gas mixture to a low pressure ( < 0.1 atm), providing an absolute 
wavelength marker during experiments. After isolating the refer- 
ence cell, the HPHT was slowly filled to the desired pressure with 
the NO mixture. 
6.2. Optical system 
An external cavity quantum cascade laser (ECQCL) (Daylight 
Solutions), with a maximum continuous wave output power of 
50 mW, was used to probe the R-branch of the NO fundamental 
band. The laser’s output frequency range (1880–1943 cm −1 ) spans 
most of the R-branch and can be tuned over that range via the 
rotation of its diffraction grating. However, its mode-hop-free re- 
gion spans only about one third of the total frequency range from 
1924 to 1943 cm −1 . Out of the laser package, the beam displays 
excellent beam quality and good collimation with little divergence 
observed through the many laser paths. Its line width is specified 
to be less than 10 MHz which qualifies as monochromatic light for 
the purposes of this work. 
Fig.  5  shows  the  optical  components  and  laser  beam  paths 
through  the  HPHT  and  reference  cells.  After  exiting  the  laser 
cavity,  the  laser  beam  was  split  with  a  zinc  selenide  (ZnSe) 
window  wedge.  One  of  the  split  beams  was  directed  through 
the HPHT and focused onto a thermoelectrically cooled mercury–
cadmium–telluride (MCT) detector (Vigo Systems) with a parabolic 
mirror. Before reaching the parabolic mirror, the remaining optical 
power ( ∼70% after transmission through ZnSe) was attenuated by 
collecting the reflection off a CaF 2 flat to ensure a maximum laser 
power to thermal emission ratio. The second beam path from the 
ZnSe beam splitter was split a second time to a reference detector 
(IR Associates) and a third beam splitter. The third beam splitter 
directs one beam through a solid germanium Fabry–Perot etalon 
(FSR = 0.0163 cm −1 ) before it is focused onto a thermoelectrically 
cooled MCT detector (Vigo Systems) with a CaF 2 lens. Lastly, the 
final beam is directed through the reference cell after which the 
beam is focused onto a thermoelectrically cooled MCT detector 
(Vigo Systems) with another CaF 2 lens. 
The grating tuning was controlled by the ECQCL controller with 
no external inputs to the controller or laser head. Timing signals 
from the ECQCL controller and signals from the four detectors 
were  recorded  at  100  kHz  by  the  multi-channel  DAQ  system 
(National Instruments PXI-6115 boards in a PXIe-1062Q chassis). 
This  sampling  rate  provided  more  than  adequate  resolution  as 
full scans from 1880 to 1945 cm −1 were complete in roughly 6 s. 
For each measurement, a dark signal, a transmission background 
signal,  and  a  transmission  signal  were  needed  for  proper  data 
processing. The dark signals capture any systematic detector signal 
offsets from the system without the laser passing through. The 
transmission background signals represent the I 0 in Eq. (1) and are 
recorded when no absorbing gas species is present in the HPHT 
cell. Finally, the transmission signals are recorded with an absorb- 
ing gas species present in the HPHT cell. The data processing steps 
will be discussed in the next section. 
7. Measurements and results 
7.1. Data reduction process 
Proper data reduction required the 4 detector signals and 3 
measurement  types  described  in  the  previous  section.  The  EC- 
QCL exhibits slight scan-to-scan intensity variations, and this is 
mitigated through use of a common-mode rejection strategy. In 
common-mode rejection, a ratio between the reference detector 
and gas cell detectors is measured as a function of optical fre- 
quency during the transmission background measurement. Thus, 
any non-absorption intensity variations measured between I 0 and 
I t are removed. The etalon signal was used as a high-resolution 
wavelength calibration to ensure alignment between the I 0 and I t 
measurement sets. To calibrate absolute wavelength, all measure- 
ments sets were collected with a low pressure mixture of dilute 
NO in N 2 in the reference cell. Fig. 6 displays transmission spectra 
after implementing common mode rejection and an example of 
the wavelength calibration procedure. 
After implementing common-mode rejection and properly cali- 
brating wavelengths, the absorbance baseline was measured from 
two background transmission measurement sets. Many optical ma- 
terials under mechanical stress exhibit birefringence. Although the 
extent of the stress-induced birefringence in the long CaF 2 rods 
was expected to be low, this effect was investigated at several 
pressures. The top panel of Fig. 6 shows the measured absorbance 
baseline when the HPHT cell was filled with 20 atm of oxygen. 
The oxygen ensured any remaining NO in the gas system was ox- 
idized, resulting in a true absorbance baseline measurement. No 
significant changes in transmitted light intensity were observed, 
and the measured baseline noise was found to be  ≈ ±0.01. Ob- 
served temperature effects were negligible since all measurements 
are recorded with the same heating load applied to the CaF 2 rods. 
7.2. Room-temperature validation 
Operation of the cell and performance of the ECQCL were first 
evaluated in room-temperature (294 K here) experiments at sev- 
eral  pressures  and  compared  to  simulations  using  the  HITRAN 
database. Following the experimental procedure outlined in the 
previous section, a mixture of 2.03% (Praxair certified grade with 
X NO uncertainty of ±2%) NO in nitrogen was added to the HPHT 
and reference cells. Fig. 7 (a) displays the validation measurement 
at 1 atm superimposed by a HITRAN simulation at the same con- 
ditions. Transition peak absorbances from the HITRAN simulation 
are about 4% higher than the measured absorbance because the 
collision-broadening coefficients ( γ) reported by HITRAN are ad- 
justed for air whereas the current measurements are in nitrogen 
[37] . Measurements of the oxygen broadening coefficient [38] in- 
dicate that γNO –O 2  is about 20% smaller than γNO –N 2  leading to 
γNO –air reported by HITRAN to be about 4% less than γNO –N 2 . With 
this adjustment made, the measured and simulated spectra agree 
more favorably with peak absorbances differing by less than 0.5%. 
Room-temperature  measurements  at  higher  pressures  up  to 
34 atm are shown in  Fig. 7 (b).  To  remain below the  optically 
thick limit, a mixture of 3500 ppm NO in nitrogen was made 
for these measurements. Since the uncertainty in this mixture is 
much higher than that of the 2.03% NO mixture, Voigt line shapes 
were fit to a 1 atm measurement to more accurately determine the 
concentration of NO. The resulting best-fit concentration was then 
used in high-pressure simulations for a better comparison with the 
measurements. 
Observed deviations from the HITRAN simulations grow with 
pressure. Super-Lorentzian absorbance is observed at the lower 
frequencies until a crossover to sub-Lorentzian absorbance occurs 
near 1936 cm −1 . These observations are consistent with trends 
found in line mixing studies [20,39,40] and in particular with ex- 
periments and calculations by Abels and DeBall [41] and Hirono 
and Ichikawa [19,42] , who reported a band-correction function for 
the absorption coefficient in the troughs between adjacent transi- 
tions at 296 K and below 1 atm in NO–N 2 mixtures. The band- 
correction function, K ( ν), is defined in Eq. (7) as the ratio of the 
observed absorption coefficient with line mixing and the absorp- 
tion coefficient due to Lorentz-type broadening. 
Measured and calculated band correction functions in [19,42] re- 
ported peak values of about 1.1 near the R-branch center which 
are  consistent  with  the  deviations  observed  here  between  1.1 
and 1.2 in the troughs between absorption peaks. Additionally, 
the reported super-to-sub Lorentzian transition frequency is near 
1936 cm −1 as observed in this work. 
7.3. High-temperature, high-pressure NO spectra 
Using the methods outlined above, the spectrum of NO in N 2 
was measured at 618 and 802 K at pressures up to 33 atm. These 
measurements  are  shown  in  Fig.  8 .  For  comparable  pressures, 
deviations  from  the  Voigt  model  using  the  HITEMP  database 
are less pronounced in high-temperature measurements than in 
room-temperature measurements. Studies have demonstrated that 
line-mixing and the breakdown of the impact approximation are 
primarily effects of gas density rather than simply gas pressure 
[17,40] .  Observed  deviations  trend  similarly  at  comparable  gas 
densities  with  the  room-temperature  measurements,  yet  the 
transition  from  super-to-sub  Lorentzian  is  no  longer  observed 
near  1936  cm −1  as  in  the  room-temperature  case.  To  the  au- 
thors’ knowledge band-correction functions for NO as a function 
of  temperature,  pressure,  and  collision  partner  have  not  been 
reported. Line mixing studies of other small molecules reporting 
band-correction  functions  at  several  temperatures  indicate  that 
as  temperature  increases  the  super-to-sub  Lorentzian  transition 
frequency  shifts,  like  the  rovibrational  intensity  distribution, 
to  frequencies  near  higher  J ′′  transitions  [39,40] .  Therefore,  a 
super-to-sub  Lorentzian  transition  is  expected  to  exist  outside 
the  tuning  range  of  the  ECQCL  used  in  this  study.  Additional 
observed deviations between the measured and simulated spec-  
tra reveal that improvements to the HITEMP database collision 
broadening  parameters,  particularly  for  high  J ′′  transitions  can 
be  made.  Furthermore,  the  inconsistencies  between  simulated 
and measured line shape broadening makes determination of the 
super-to-sub  Lorentzian  transition  frequency  difficult.  The  need 
to improve existing databases to properly account for collisional 
effects  at  high-temperatures  is  evident  from  the  high-pressure, 
high-temperature spectra presented here. 
8. Summary and conclusions 
The design, build, and operation of an optical cell for high- 
temperature,  high-pressure  mid-IR  spectroscopy  was  presented. 
For  optical  access  from  ∼ 0.15  to  8  μm,  the  optical  cell  uses 
16 cm CaF 2 rods to penetrate the temperature gradient imposed 
by  the  single-zone  furnace  used  as  the  primary  heating  load. 
Penetration by the CaF 2 rods allows the optical cell’s gas-tight seal 
to be maintained at much lower temperature during operation at 
high-temperature set points. Temperature uniformity across the 
optical path length of 21.3 cm is maintained by the temperature- 
controlled  single-zone  furnace  and  temperature-controlled  band 
heaters attached to the body of the optical cell. Good temperature 
uniformity up to 800 K and pressure stability above 30 atm were 
demonstrated. 
Spectra of the R-branch in the fundamental rovibrational band 
of nitric oxide at several temperatures and pressures up to 800 K 
and 34 atm, respectively, were measured by an ECQCL for the op- 
tical cell’s characterization and demonstration of utility. Deviations 
between the measurements and a Voigt-based model using the 
HITRAN/HITEMP databases were observed with increasing gas den- 
sity. These deviations are attributed primarily to line-mixing, but 
at elevated temperatures, inconsistencies between the observed 
pressure broadening and that of the HITEMP/HITRAN databases 
is evident. These findings emphasize the need for high-pressure 
and  high-temperature  spectroscopy  experiments  to  characterize 
high gas density phenomena, and this facility provides a practical 
means to study the spectra of molecules into the mid-IR. 
