Deep neural network inversion for 3D laser absorption imaging of methane in reacting flows
Abstract
Mid-infrared laser absorption imaging of methane in flames
is performed with a learning-based approach to the limited
view-angle  inversion  problem.  A  deep  neural  network  is
trained with superimposed Gaussian field distributions of
spectral absorption coefficients, and the prediction capabil-
ity is compared to linear tomography methods at a varying
number of view angles for simulated fields representative
of a flame pair. Experimental 3D imaging is demonstrated
on a methane–oxygen laminar flame doublet (<cm) backlit
with  tunable  radiation  from  an  interband  cascade  laser
near 3.16 µm. Spectrally resolved data at each pixel provide
for species-specific projected absorbance. 2D images were
collected at six projection angles on a high-speed infrared
camera,  yielding  an  aggregate  of  27,648  unique  lines  of
sight capturing the scene with a pixel resolution of ∼70 µm.
Mole fraction measurements are inferred from the predicted
absorption coefficient images using an estimated tempera-
ture field, showing consistency with expected values from
reactant flow rates. To the authors’ knowledge, this work
represents the first 3D imaging of methane in a reacting
flow.   
INTRODUCTION
Methane  (CH4)  is  an  important  molecule  in  combustion
chemistry, representing the primary fuel component of natural
gas  and  a  key  intermediate  in  larger  hydrocarbon  oxidation.
Accordingly, quantitative imaging of methane in flame envi-
ronments  is  desired  to  discern  the  competitive  physics  of
chemical kinetics with mass and heat transport. Some optical
methods have shown potential for imaging methane in high-
temperature reacting flows, albeit with somewhat constrained
applicability. Point and line measurements of CH4  in flames
have  been  performed  with  Raman  scattering  techniques  [1],
and 2D tomographic measurements have been performed using
near-infrared  diode  laser  absorption  in  oscillating  CH4–air
flames [2] and marine engine cylinders [3]. Here, we present a
novel mid-infrared optical method for 3D imaging of CH4  in
high-temperature flame environments.
Advances  in  midwave  infrared  photonics  have  enabled
tomographic  absorption  spectroscopy  [4]  at  the  fundamen-
tal  vibrational  frequencies  of  important  combustion  species,
providing for sensitive thermochemical measurements in small-
scale reacting flows using compact low-power light sources [5].
Laser  absorption  imaging  (LAI)  is  a  complimentary  method
developed to capture scenes backlit with tunable laser radiation
at very high spatial resolution using high-speed infrared cameras
[6–8]. A representative optical arrangement, used in this work,
is shown in Fig. 1. Recently, LAI has been successfully coupled
with 1D tomography for quantitative imaging of axisymmetric
flow-field thermochemistry at sub-100-µm resolution [6,7].
Tomographic  imaging  of  non-axisymmetric  flows  is  more
challenging—multiple   projection   angles   are   required   to
estimate  the  flow-field  scalars,  and  the  inversion  problem  is
underdetermined  [4,9].  Limited  view  angles  often  result  in
a blurring effect and artifacts in the reconstructed flow-field,
complicating  applications  to  flames,  which  have  very  thin
(∼1 mm) reaction zones. Laser absorption tomography efforts
in combustion flows have demonstrated different approaches to
the inversion problem, including both linear [10–13] and non-
linear [14,15] methods utilizing various optical arrangements.
Increasingly  complex  and  dense  lines  of  sight  configurations
require  computationally  efficient  image  processing  methods.
Recently,  predictive  models  utilizing  neural  networks  have
shown  promise  to  more  efficiently  solve  the  inversion  prob-
lem with limited information, and have been applied to both
simulated flows [16] and emission measurements of real flows
[17–19]. Here, we combine a deep neural network inversion
with LAI to achieve high-resolution 3D imaging of CH4  in a
non-axisymmetric  high-temperature  flow-field.  We  compare
the deep neural network inversion to linear tomography, assess-
ing performance with regards to accuracy and computational
cost, via both simulation and experiment.
With  any  tomographic  absorption  spectroscopy  method,
the   analytical   problem   reduces   to   inverting   line-of-sight
integrated  (or  projected)  absorption  data  [4,9].  For  a  non-
uniform gas medium, the Beer–Lambert law integrated over
wavenumber   ν[cm−1]—or   the   projected   absorbance   area
A j ,proj[cm−1]—can be expressed for each line-of-sight
where α(ν) is spectral absorbance, I0  is incident light intensity,
and It  is transmitted light intensity. L [cm] is the aggregate path
length along the line of sight. Thermochemical properties of
the nonuniform medium are embedded in the spatially resolved
absorption coefficient K j [cm−2], where total pressure P  [atm]
is assumed 1 atm, S j (T)[cm−2/atm] is the line strength of rovi-
brational transition j at temperature T[K], and X abs is the mole
fraction. For tomographic LAI, Eq. (1) applies to each camera
pixel, wherein spectrally resolved absorbance can be integrated
to yield 2D images of A j ,proj, representative examples of which
are depicted in the insets of Fig. 1 for different viewing angles.
With multiple projection angles, each horizontal row of pixels
in each 2D image can be treated independently for subsequent
reconstruction of the flow-field scalar K j . For the experimental
setup depicted in Fig. 1, we target a collection of rovibrational
transitions comprising the R(15) manifold of the v3  asymmet-
ric stretch band of CH4  near 3.16 µm. The line strengths for
these transitions do not vary more than 10% for temperatures
between 450 and 750 K [20], enabling quantitative inference of
mole fraction from K j  in the preheat zone.
METHOD
In this study, we utilize a deep neural network to perform the
inversion of line-of-sight integrated absorption measurements
A j ,proj to solve for K j , and compare its reconstruction perform-
ance with linear 2D tomography methods. The training dataset
consists of 2D fields of the methane absorption coefficient K j ,
represented as superimposed Gaussian distributions as shown
in the top of Fig. 2. The simulations included 5000 variations in
intensity, size, and relative locations of the Gaussians. The cor-
responding projected absorbance areas A j ,proj  are subsequently
calculated utilizing Radon transforms to represent the measure-
ment data at each angle with appropriate pixel density reflecting
the LAI experimental setup. Gaussian noise (3%) was applied
to the input, enabling the network to learn robust inversion
from potentially corrupted measurements. The neural network
architecture is adapted from a unified deep learning framework
shown to efficiently reconstruct a variety of imaging fields [21].
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the input layer FC1 takes a measured
sinogram of  A j ,proj  (6 × 64) of the CH4  rovibrational transi-
tion, reshapes it into a 1 × 384 vector, and then fully connects it
to a 1 × 4096 dimensional hidden layer FC2 with a hyperbolic
tangent activation. This hidden layer FC2 is fully connected to
another hidden layer FC3 with hyperbolic tangent activation,
and is reshaped to a 64 × 64 matrix for convolutional process-
ing. The convolutional layers C1 and C2 convolve 64 filters
of 5 × 5 with stride 1 followed by rectifier nonlinearities. The
final output layer deconvolves the C2 layer with 64 filters of
7 × 7 with stride 1, representing the reconstructed K j  field. The
loss function minimized during training is an L2  mean squared
loss  between  the  network  output  and  the  labeled  K j    fields.
The RMSprop algorithm is used with minibatches of size 50,
learning rate 0.001, momentum 0.0, and decay 0.9. The net-
work was trained for 100 epochs (typically 20–30 mins) on the
Tensorflow deep learning framework using an 8 GB NVIDIA
RTX 2080 graphics card. Via the training process, an effective
inversion operator is learned to predict spatially resolved 2D K j .
This bypasses the numerical inversion of A j ,proj to K j  obtained
through conventional tomography methods.
To  assess  the  predictive  accuracy  of  the  deep  learning
inversion method on a flame pair, the approach is applied to
reconstruct reference simulations of representative 2D K j  fields
using various numbers of projection angles, as shown in Fig. 3.
These  2D  K j    fields  and  their  A j ,proj   projections  are  similar
to but not part of the original training set, and so serve as an
independent reconstruction assessment. Tikhonov-regularized
linear 2D tomography is also applied to the reference fields.
The regularization parameter λ and the smoothing matrix L are
chosen to yield a value of λ that pads the small singular values
but  does  not  overwhelm  the  large  nontrivial  singular  values
[9]. An aggregate root mean square error (RSME) was used as
a comparative metric, calculated as the square root of the aver-
aged squared differences between a reconstructed image and its
corresponding “ground truth” image.
As expected, utilizing a greater number of projection angles
was shown to improve the resolution of peaks and valleys in the
reconstructed  K j   fields for both methods. The deep learning
approach is shown to predict the steep spatial gradients with
equal or greater accuracy (as measured by RMS error) than linear
tomographic methods while concurrently reducing the required
number of projections, even in the cases where the  K j   fields
overlap. Nonphysical absorption artifacts are also observed in
the linear tomographic reconstructions outside of the simulated
reaction zones, a common consequence of the underdetermined
inversion [9]. Notably, the linear tomographic methods show
increasing reconstruction error when the pixel density per flame
structure is reduced, as in the smaller flames in the bottom row
of Fig. 3. The neural network inversion appears less sensitive
to the pixel density, showing a typical reduction in RMSE by a
factor of ∼4−6 relative to corresponding linear tomographic
solutions. We can observe for the experimentally relevant test
case (bottom row), the learning-based approach utilizing three
projection angles has a RSME only 10% greater than the linear
tomographic approach utilizing 12 projection angles.
RESULT
With the deep learning approach tested via simulation, the
neural network inversion was utilized for measurements of the
flame doublets shown in Fig. 1. A distributed feedback (DFB)
interband cascade laser (ICL) near 3.16 µm is used to spectrally
scan across the CH4  R(15) manifold. The beam is expanded
with a concave lens, and expanded again horizontally with a
cylindrical  lens.  The  expanding  beam  is  recollimated  with  a
concave mirror, then pitched through the flow-field comprising
two  Bunsen-style  flames,  each  with  flame  brushes  approxi-
mately 3 mm in diameter. The beam is spectrally isolated with
a bandpass  filter  (Spectrogon, 3160 ± 60 nm),  and  a plano–
convex lens focuses the expanded beam onto the detector array
of the camera. The beam is captured in the camera detector
subwindow of size 64 × 48 with a frame rate of 40 kHz and
integration time of 5 µs. The laser is injection-current tuned
using a sawtooth waveform at 400 Hz, resulting in 100 points
per scan for both I0 and It  for each pixel. The spectrally resolved
absorbance α(ν) is determined using Eq. (1) and is subsequently
fitted using the Voigt line shape model to obtain the projected
absorbance area A j ,proj. For each projection angle measurement,
data are collected at two heights using a vertical translation stage
and later combined after deleting overlapping pixels, yielding
64 × 72 lines of sight to capture the whole flame brush. Each
projection image is collected and averaged over 1 s (400 scan
average), an interval over which the flames are assumed steady.
By imaging a wire mesh with known dimensions backlit with
laser radiation [7], the pixel resolution was determined to be
∼ 70 µm per pixel in the horizontal direction.
The flame pair is mounted on a rotational stage to image
the flow-field from a variety of angles, as shown in Fig. 1. The
partially premixed flames were controlled via thermal mass flow
controllers (MKS MFC GE50A) with combined reactant flow
rates of 150 sccm CH4  and 100 sccm O2. This corresponds
to a fuel-rich mixture with a molar fuel–air equivalence ratio
of φ ≈ 3. After the flows are split to the two burners, one flow
is  measured  with  a  rotameter  to  ensure  equal  flow  through
each burner. The exit velocity of each flow is 0.33 m/s, and the
jet exits of the stainless steel burners are 1.6 mm in diameter,
providing a laminar jet Reynolds number of ∼36.
For each horizontal row of pixels in the measured 2D A j ,proj
images,  the  learning-based  inversion  operator  is  applied  to
predict  the  K j    field  distribution  for  the  R(15)  manifold  of
CH4.  Assembling  the  predictions  for  each  horizontal  row,  a
3D field of K j   is obtained, as shown in Fig. 4. Learning-based
predictions utilizing six projection angles of 2D A j ,proj  images
are shown alongside corresponding results obtained using 2D
linear  tomography.  The  images  are  self-consistent  in  recon-
struction of the twin flames, exhibiting similar heights, widths,
and  magnitudes.  However,  the  flames  diverge  in  magnitude
and  diameter  when  comparing  the  deep  learning  and  linear
tomography results. Steeper spatial gradients of K j  are resolved
within the reacting flow utilizing the learning-based approach,
and this is seen more clearly in the 2D cross sections in the top of
Fig. 4. As in the simulations, the learning-based approach also
mitigates  image  artifacts  and  angular  asymmetry  around  the
flame observed in the results of the linear tomographic method.
Reconstruction performance of both the linear tomography
and neural network inversion is examined in further detail with
1D profiles shown in Fig. 5. The left of Fig. 5 compares 1D
cross-sectional  profiles  of  K j    reconstructions  obtained  from
both linear tomography and deep learning in relation to the
“ground truth” for the simulated K j   field indicated in Fig. 3.
The  uncertainty  shown  associated  with  each  reconstruction
is calculated by performing the reconstructions with different
flow-field orientations [22]. Though a “ground truth” for the
reconstructed K j  fields determined from the experimental mea-
surements is unknown, an analogous comparison can be made
for the experimental K j   fields at the base of the flames nearest
the burner surface, indicated by Fig. 4. Given an independently
measured or estimated temperature field, Eq. (1) can be used
to obtain a mole fraction field for CH4. The right of Fig. 5
shows the resulting 1D profiles of CH4 mole fraction assuming
a  uniform  temperature  of  450  K  (based  on  a  thermocouple
measurement  at  burner  exit).  While  the  temperature  in  this
plane is certainly not uniform, the CH4 absorption line strength
exhibits relative insensitivity to temperature—Error bars cap-
ture  a  possible  temperature  range  between  400  and  750  K.
This simplified analysis provides clear indication that the mole
fraction at the core of the flame (X CH4  ≈ 0.59) is more closely
estimated by the neural network inversion, even with only three
imaging angles.
Additionally, the learning-based approach reduces compu-
tational load compared to linear tomography with Tikhonov
regularization. The reconstructions are more efficient once the
networks are established (20–30 min of training): on an Intel(R)
Core(TM)  i7-9700  K  3.60  GHz  CPU,  the  neural  network
completed reconstructions in 0.35 s while linear tomography
took ∼3 s.
CONCLUSION
A  deep  learning  approach  to  the  inversion  problem  for
absorption  tomography  was  coupled  with  a  high-resolution
LAI for 3D species imaging, and evaluated by simulation and
experiment. To the authors’ knowledge, the experimental effort
represents the first 3D imaging of methane in a flame, attaining
a pixel resolution ∼ 70 µm. Initial results suggest that the neural
network inversion has potential to more accurately predict flame
structures with fewer projection angles than linear tomography,
and reduces computational load. Extension of this method to
more complex flame structures may require more sophisticated
simulations to generate appropriate training data. While the fuel
structures examined here were well-approximated by Gaussian
distributions  (validated  independently  by  single-flame  Abel
inversion), turbulent flow structures and intermediate or prod-
uct fields likely require more physical (and difficult to simulate)
representations.
