Microbial community and geochemical analyses of trans-trench sediments for understanding the roles of hadal environments
Abstract
Hadal trench bottom (>6000 m below sea level) sediments harbor higher microbial cell abundance compared with adjacent abyssal plain sediments. This is supported by the accumulation of sedimentary organic matter (OM), facilitated by trench topography. However, the distribution of benthic microbes in different trench systems has not been well explored yet. Here, we carried out small subunit ribosomal RNA gene tag sequencing for 92 sediment subsamples of seven abyssal and seven hadal sediment cores collected from three trench regions in the northwest Paci?c Ocean: the Japan, Izu-Ogasawara, and Mariana Trenches. Tag-sequencing analyses showed speci?c distribution patterns of several phyla associated with oxygen and nitrate. The community structure was distinct between abyssal and hadal sediments, following geographic locations and factors represented by sediment depth. Co-occurrence network revealed six potential prokaryotic consortia that covaried across regions. Our results further support that the OM cycle is driven by hadal currents and/or rapid burial shapes microbial community structures at trench bottom sites, in addition to vertical deposition from the surface ocean. Our trans-trench analysis highlights intra- and inter-trench distributions of microbial assemblages and geochemistry in surface sea?oor sediments, providing novel insights into ultradeep-sea microbial ecology, one of the last frontiers on our planet.
Introduction
The abyssal plain extends from the continental slope to the rim of deep trenches (3000每6000 m below sea level [mbsl])
and covers 85% of the global sea?oor area, while the hadal zone (>6000 mbsl) comprises 1每2% of it [1, 2]. In general, abyssal water and sediments are usually oligotrophic, and physical and chemical conditions (e.g., salinity, tempera- ture, dissolved oxygen, and nutrient concentrations) in hadal water are similar to the overlying abyssal water despite the higher hydrostatic pressure [1每3]. However, cell abundance and microbial carbon turnover rates are sig- ni?cantly higher at hadal trench bottom compared with abyssal plain sediment below the surface layer, while those in outermost surface layer are sometimes comparable between hadal and abyssal sites [4]. This could be hypo- thesized to be attributed to factors apart from the vertical downward ?ux of sinking organic matter (OM) from the ocean surface and hydrostatic pressure.
﹛Hadal zones are generally located in oceanic trenches that are formed along plate boundaries by the movement of oceanic plates, and thus experience episodic and/or regular landslides [5, 6]. These landslides cause downward trans- portation of surface sediments along with relatively fresh OM via the funnel effect of trench geomorphology [7每11]. Moreover, higher sedimentation rates and concentrations of subsea?oor organic compounds in hadal trench bottom sediments compared with neighboring abyssal plain sedi- ments have been reported in multiple trench regions under oligotrophic and eutrophic oceans [4, 11每14]. Therefore, the labile organic carbon deposition in hadal zone supported by the high sedimentation is considered to facilitate establish- ment of distinct faunal and prokaryotic community observed at global scales [15每19]. Recently, the in?uence of physicochemical features on hadal biospheres were reported for microbial communities in the Mariana and Kermadec Trench regions [20, 21], where under oligotrophic and relatively eutrophic (intermediate)  ocean,  respectively [22, 23]; the pioneering studies reported microbial biodi- versity in hadal trench bottom, trench slope, and adjusted abyssal plain sediments using culture-independent high- throughput sequencing techniques, and consequently demonstrated the structural similarity among each abyssal and hadal site. However, relations between geochemistry and microbial composition in hadal trench bottom and adjacent abyssal sediments have been still uninvestigated.
Here, we evaluated prokaryotic community structure in
92 sediment subsamples of 14 sediment cores collected from four hadal trench bottom and seven adjacent abyssal plain sites located in three trenches in the northwest Paci?c Ocean; the Japan, Izu-Ogasawara (Izu-Bonin), and Mariana Trenches (Fig. 1 and Table S1). The Japan and Mariana Trenches lie under eutrophic and oligotrophic oceans, respectively, while the primary productivity of the ocean above the Izu-Ogasawara Trench presents intermediate features. We performed geochemical analyses of the sedi- ments and culture-independent microbial analyses including
direct cell count, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), and tag sequencing for small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) gene, to investigate intra- and inter- trench diversities of prokaryotic communities and potential metabolic interactions using co-occurrence networks. Our analyses illuminated the distinctive prokaryotic assemblages that spread through the trenches in each of abyssal and hadal zones, providing new insights into the microbial ecology in deep ocean, where one of the least understood aquatic habitats.
Materials and methods
Sediment samplings
Sediment cores were collected over ?ve cruises by Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAM- STEC); Research Vessel (R/V) Kairei KR11-11 (December 2011) and KR15-01 (March 2015) cruises and R/V Yoko- suka YK11-06 (September 2011) cruise for the Izu- Ogasawara Trench, R/V Kairei KR12-19  (December 2012) cruise for the Japan Trench, and R/V Kairei KR14-01 cruise (January 2014) for the Mariana Trench (Fig. 1 and Table S1). The water depths ranged from 4700 to 10,902 mbsl. Among the 11 sites, four were located on the hadal trench bottom (※hadal sites§), while the other seven were located on the adjacent abyssal plain (※abyssal sites§).
﹛Sediment cores were obtained by a gravity corer of the remotely operated vehicle (ROV) ※ABISMO§ [24] during KR11-11 and KR15-01 cruises, a free fall 11K lander system [25] during KR11-11, KR12-19, and KR15-01 cruises, a multiple corer system during KR14-01 cruise, and push corers of human occupied vehicle (HOV) ※Shinkai 6500§ during YK11-06 cruise. In each sampling operation, a Conductivity, Temperature, and Depth sensor SBE-19 or SBE-49 (Sea-Bird Electronics, Bellevue, WA, USA) was used. Among the sampling operations, two operations were conducted for sites IO1 and IOC in the Izu-Ogasawara Trench (station pairs IO1-1 and IO1-2, and IOC-1 and IOC- 2, respectively) and site MC in the Mariana Trench (MC-1 and MC-2). Sediment core lengths taken by the push corer, multiple corer, and 11K lander system ranged from 25 to 50 cm, while those collected from IOB and IOC-1 stations using the gravity corer were ~120每150 cm. Note that sediment每water interface of the sediment cores taken by the gravity corer might be more disturbed by sampling opera- tions compared with the other coring systems.
﹛Collected sediment cores were immediately subsampled onboard at 2- to 10-cm-depth intervals for geochemical and microbiology analyses. Porewater was extracted by cen- trifugation at 2600 ℅ g for 10 min, and then supernatant (seawater) was ?ltered using a 0.2-?m syringe cartridge
?lter. Subsamples were stored at ?80 and ?20 ∼C for molecular and geochemical analyses, respectively. Sedi- ment samples for direct cell counting were ?xed with or without  5 mL  formaldehyde  solution  (?nal concentration
2% w/v in PBS buffer) for 1 h at room temperature onboard
attached to the inside of the transparent polycarbonate core liner tube and oxygen concentrations were measured from the outside. The sensors were calibrated with air-saturated and oxygen-free seawater before measurements. Porewater
nutrient concentrations (NO 每, NO 每, PO , and NH +)  were
and stored at ?80 ∼C.
Geochemical analyses
Dissolved oxygen (O2) concentrations in the sediment cores were measured onboard immediately after core recovery using a planar optode oxygen sensor Fibox 3 (PreSens, Regensburg, Germany). For the gravity core samples, small (~3 mm) holes were opened along the side of the core tube at 2每5 cm depth intervals, and the sensor was inserted into the sediments. For sediment cores collected by the push corer, multiple corer, and 11K lander system, the sensor spots were
analyzed spectrophotometrically using an automated continuous-?ow QuAAtro 2-HR analyzer (BL TEC, Osaka, Japan) in an onshore laboratory [26].
﹛Total organic carbon (TOC), total nitrogen (TN), and their C and N isotopic compositions were measured by ?ash combustion with an elemental analyzer Flash EA 1112 ser- ies coupled via Con?oIV to an isotope ratio mass spectro- meter DELTAplus Advantage (Thermo Fisher Scienti?c, Waltham, MA, USA) for KR15-01 sediment samples or DELTA V Advantage (Thermo Fisher Scienti?c) for the other sediment samples. Before measuring, the sediment samples were freeze-dried and acidi?ed with 1 M HCl to
remove inorganic carbon. The decalci?ed sediments were then dried, weighed, and put into precleaned tin cups for ?ash combustion. The stable isotope ratios are reported as 汛 values, in which 汛 = (Rsam/Rstd每1) ℅ 1000, with R being the isotope ratios (either 13C/12C or 15N/14N) in the sample and standard, respectively. The carbon isotope ratio of TOC was referenced against Vienna Pee Dee Belemnite. The nitrogen isotope ratios of TN were referenced against atmospheric N2. The analytical precision achieved through repeated analyses of in-house standards was typically better than  0.2㏑ for both 汛13C and 汛15N.
Cell counting
For determining total cell abundance in sediments collected during KR11-11, KR12-19, and KR14-01 cruises, microbial cells were ?xed with sterile 0.2-?m pre?ltered 3.7% for- maldehyde solution onboard and stored at ?80 ∼C until subsequent processes onshore as follows. The samples were centrifuged, washed with 4.5 mL PBS buffer, and resus- pended in a PBS and 100% ethanol (1:1) mixture. After  sonication using a Branson Soni?er 220 (Danbury, CT, USA), samples were diluted, ?ltered onto 0.2-米m poly- carbonate ?lters, and stained using SYBR Green I. Excess stain was removed three times using 3 mL Milli-Q water, and then ?lters were mounted onto microscope slides and cells were counted under blue light by epi?uorescence microscopy Axioskop 2MOT (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) at ℅1000 magni?cation [27]. For sediments collected from the KR15-01 cruise, frozen samples were suspended in 5 mL PBS containing 4% formaldehyde and incubated at 4 ∼C for 1每2 h. Samples were then centrifuged, repeatedly washed with PBS, resuspended in 5 mL PBS and 100% ethanol (1:1) mixture, and stored at ?20 ∼C. Fixed samples were diluted with PBS and sonicated for 20 s with an ultrasonic homogenizer UH-50 (SMT, Tokyo, Japan). Cells in the aliquant were stained directly using SYBR Green I and counted with an Olympus BX51 ?uorescence micro- scope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) at ℅1500 magni?cation [28]. For each ?lter, at least 400 cells were counted in at least 20 randomly chosen ?elds.
DNA extraction, qPCR, and sequencing
Approximately 5 mL of frozen subsampled sediments from certain cores sections were used for DNA extraction. Environmental DNA was extracted using the PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (Qiagen) with a minor modi?cation to increase DNA yield: cells were shaken for 10 min after incubating at 65 ∼C twice.
﹛The abundance of prokaryotic and archaeal SSU rRNA genes was enumerated by qPCR analyses. Primer and probe sequences and PCR conditions are summarized in Table S2
[29, 30]. SSU rRNA gene copy numbers were quanti?ed as averages of duplicates or triplicates for each sediment sample. For the qPCR analyses, 7500 Real-Time PCR System and StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA) were used. For the pre- paration of qPCR mixtures, qPCR Quick GoldStar Mas- termix Plus (Eurogentec, Seraing, Belgium) and Premix Ex Taq (Perfect Real Time) (Takara Bio, Shiga, Japan) were applied. No ampli?ed products were obtained from Milli-Q water as negative control samples in all ampli?cation trials.
﹛For SSU rRNA gene tag sequencing, the V4每V5 region of SSU rRNA gene was ampli?ed from the environmental DNA assemblages using a primer set of U530F and U907R and LA Taq DNA polymerase with GC buffer (Takara Bio) [31, 32]. Primer sets and PCR conditions are summarized in Table S3. For ampli?cation, Illumina adaptor sequence (ACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT)
and Illumina Multiplexing PCR Primer 2.0 sequence (GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT)
were added to the 5? ends of the primers U530F and U907R, respectively. No ampli?ed products were obtained from Milli-Q water as negative control samples in all ampli?ca- tion trials. The amplicons were mixed with Illumina PhiX control libraries and sequenced by Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) at JAMSTEC. The letter, serial number, ※S,§ and digits for each sample name represent the sampling site, experimental replication (if conducted),  sample   type   (S   for   sediment),   and   upper sediment depth of subsampled layer.
Bioinformatics
For raw sequence data, both ends of reads that contained low- quality bases (Phred quality score < 20) and the adapter sequences were trimmed using TrimGalore (https://github. com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore) with default settings. The remaining pair-end reads were merged with at least 10 bp overlap using FLASH [33] under default settings. Sequencing reads derived from PhiX genome were removed using Bowtie2 [34] using default settings. Chimeric sequences were ?ltered out using UCHIME [35] with default settings, and sequences with low complexity or shorter than 100 bp were discarded using PRINSEQ with -lc_threshold 7 setting. All remaining high-quality sequences were clustered with a 97% identity threshold using VSEARCH [36]. After discarding singletons [37], each cluster was designated as an operational taxonomic unit (OTU). Collector's curve was calculated using RTK [38] with default settings. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis was conducted using Bray每Curtis dissimilarities, and multiresponse permutation procedures (MRPP) test was conducted with 999 permutations and same dissimilarity indices. The taxonomic names of each OTU were systematically assigned using blastn search [39] against
SILVA database release 132 [40] and retrieving the top hit sequence that showed e values ≒ 1E?15.
﹛A network structure of OTU co-occurrence was visua- lized using naive statistical metrics with strict cutoff values to consider a valid co-occurrence event. We used OTUs that represent >0.1% of the total sequencing pool, and pairwise correlations with >0.8 Spearman's correlation coef?cient (老) with Q values < 0.01 after Bonferroni correction; networks involved in more than two OTUs were analyzed.
﹛The 16S rRNA gene sequences of Flavobacteriaceae sp. PRS1 and Thaumarchaeota were retrieved from IMG/M
[41] and SILVA [40] databases, respectively. The sequen- ces of Thaumarchaeota were systematically reduced in family level via similarity-based clustering with 90% identity using VSEARCH [36]. A maximum-likelihood tree was constructed using FastTree2 [42] with GTR + CAT option. Phylogenetic clades of Thaumarchaeota were af?liated following past studies [43, 44].
Data deposition
Amplicon sequence data were deposited into the DDBJ Sequence Read Archive under DRA008185 and DRA008316 (Table S1). All data were registered under BioProject ID PSUB010125.
Results and discussions
Organic geochemistry
TOC and TN in the studied sediments ranged from 0.10 to
3.28 and 0.02 to 0.42 wt%, respectively (Figs. S1 and S2). TOC concentrations were in general lower at the abyssal (0.10每0.55 wt%) than hadal stations (0.29每3.28 wt%), although large  variations were observed  at  the hadal  sta-
in the Mariana Trench sites (0.16每0.59 and 0.02每0.08 wt%, respectively), which differed by an order of magnitude. The C/N ratio was concordant with past observations that con- centrations of protein, carbohydrate, and lipid were gen- erally higher in the Izu-Ogasawara Trench region compared with the Mariana Trench [45]. The 汛15N values of surface sediments may re?ect nutrient availability at the ocean surface due to isotopic fractionation during nutrient con- sumption by phytoplankton [46]; nutrient-rich conditions can lead to lower values (5.1每5.4㏑ and 2.4每8.2㏑ at the Japan and Izu-Ogasawara Trenches, respectively), whereas nutrient-poor conditions cause higher values (8.9每11.7㏑ at the Mariana Trench). Thus, the sedimental OM concentra- tions and traits likely re?ect the different geographical set- tings and productivity of the investigated station. It is generally expected that the organic carbon deposition and subsequent diagenetic process re?ects the surface pro- ductivity of the overlying ocean. The Japan Trench (station JC) is located under the relatively eutrophic north-western Paci?c Ocean, where nutrient-rich Oyashio currents encounter warm Kuroshio currents; In addition, the close distance to Honshu island, Japan, may contribute terrestrial OM to the sea?oor [47, 48]. In contrast, the other stations are located under the oligotrophic Paci?c Ocean, far from continents or large islands. In particular, the Mariana Trench region is located near a subtropical gyre known to have one of the lowest surface ocean productivities [49]. Even if de?nitive conclusions could not be made from the available data, the differences in C/N ratios of each site could re?ect differences in OM sources as well as stable isotopic signatures.
Porewater chemistry
We measured concentrations of dissolved oxygen (O2) and porewater nutrients (NO3每, NO 每, NH +, and PO ) in the
tions. At the abyssal sites, TOC concentrations of the out- ermost layers were 0.42 ㊣ 0.09 wt% (n = 7), and gradually decreased to 0.22 ㊣ 0.10 wt% around 15 cm below sea?oor (cmbsf) (Fig. S1). At the hadal sites TOC concentrations also decreased with sediments depth from 1.39 ㊣ 0.95 wt% (n = 6) at the outermost layers to 0.95 ㊣ 0.61 wt% on average around 15 cmbsf. However, variations between the stations were substantially large and decreasing trend is less clear than abyssal sites. These trends are concordant to the previous ?ndings that reported rapid sediment deposition and burial at hadal trench bottom compared with adjacent abyssal plain [4]. Layers with high TOC concentration were found in JC and IO1-2 hadal cores, which may be explained by event deposit (e.g., [9]).
﹛Among the hadal sites, the highest TOC and TN values were detected in the Japan Trench sites (1.63每3.28 and 0.22每0.42 wt%, respectively) and the lowest were observed
obtained cores (Figs. 2 and S3) to study microbial decom- position of sedimentary OM using oxygen and/or nitrate as electron acceptors [50]. O2 concentrations decreased rapidly with increasing sediment depth in most sediment cores and depleted above 30 cmbsf, whilst those of abyssal cores collected from the Mariana Trench showed moderate decreases. The oxygen concentrations and decreasing trends at the Mariana trench region (~120每180 and 50每150 米M at the abyssal and hadal sites, respectively, in 0每16 cmbsf depth) were generally similar to those previously reported (130每180 and 50每180 米M) [4]. The NO 每 concentrations in outermost layers at all stations except JC were ~35 米M and this was concordant with those in seawater at hadal zone in Izu-Ogasawara [8]. In all hadal cores, NO3每 concentrations drastically decreased with sediment depth to less than 5 米M above 30 cmbsf with a concomitant increase in NH4+ con- centrations, especially at the Japan and Izu-Ogasawara
Trenches. In contrast, no apparent depletion of NO 每 (> 27 米M) and lower NH + concentrations (<11 米M) were observed throughout the sediment depths in all abyssal stations from the Izu-Ogasawara and Mariana Trench regions, which also exhibited low TOC concentrations. Notably, NO ? pro?les showed large variations among hadal sediments compared with abyssal sediments. Among the NO2每 pro?les, clear subsurface peaks up to 6.6 米M were found in only three sediment cores (3, 7, and 7 cmbsf of cores from JC, IO1-1, and IO1-2, respectively). PO4 con- centrations generally increased with sediment depth, except for stations IO1-1 and IO1-2. These pro?les of dissolved oxygen and nitrogen compounds are concordant with pre- vious studies [4, 51]. The pro?les suggested that microbial nitrate respiration was relatively modest in abyssal sedi- ments down to 50 cmbsf, whereas the respiration was active in hadal sediments above 30 cmbsf, probably re?ecting higher concentrations of fresh OM. Interestingly, the increase rate of NH + in hadal sediments along with sedi- ment depth were gradually changed along with latitude of the sites (i.e., higher increasing rates at the northern site (JC) while lower in southern sites (MC-1 and MC-2)), suggestive of variance among stations in microbial populations and functions involved in nitrogen cycles.
Microbial abundances
The direct cell counting and qPCR technique showed similar trends in microbial abundance (Figs. 3 and S4).
Cell abundances by cell counting ranged from 4.2 ℅ 105 to
9.6 ℅ 107 cells/mL sediment, with a general decrease with sediment depth, while scattered pro?les were found in the hadal sites of the Japan and Izu-Ogasawara Trenches (Figs. 3a and S4a). The cell densities were similar to or even higher than those reported in other works [4, 52]. Cell abundances in the hadal stations were generally higher than those in the adjacent abyssal stations. When comparing maximum cell abundances between cores, the largest and smallest cell abundances in hadal sites were found in the Japan and Mariana Trenches, respectively; for abyssal sites, abundance at the Izu-Ogasawara Trench was larger than that of the Mariana Trench. For qPCR analysis, the copy numbers of prokaryotic and archaeal SSU rRNA gene  in  each  station ranged from 3.4 ℅ 105 to
3.0 ℅ 109 and 9.9 ℅ 104 to 5.7 ℅ 108 copies/mL sediment, respectively (Figs. 3b and S4b). In addition, in the Mariana Trench region only, copy numbers from the shallow abyssal sediments were higher than those from the hadal sediments. The SSU rRNA gene copy numbers were 2每197-fold higher than the cell abundances by direct counting method, likely resulting from biases associated with direct cell counting (e.g., staining) [28] and mole- cular analyses (e.g., primers, probes, extracellular DNA, and/or SSU rRNA gene copy numbers on prokaryotic genomes [53, 54]. However, cell abundance and SSU rRNA gene copy number was signi?cantly correlated  (Fig. S5). Interestingly, the ratio of archaea to prokaryotes rapidly decreased at approximately under 20 cmbsf of the
hadal cores, while higher values were observed through the vertical pro?le in abyssal cores (Figs. 3c and S4c), which may be explained by lower nutrient availability in abyssal than hadal sites. Overall, these trends were con- sistent with previous studies [4, 52, 55, 56], supporting more vigorous microbial activity in hadal trench bottom sediments, especially in the subsurface under 5 cmbsf.
OTU-level compositions of microbial communities in sediment samples
Based on the geochemical pro?les in sediments, especially dissolved oxygen and nitrate concentrations, we selected four to ten layers from each sediment core for SSU rRNA gene tag sequencing. A total of 8,286,508 high-quality SSU
rRNA gene sequences with 414 bp average length were  obtained from the 92 sediment subsamples. The sequences comprised of 80,478 OTUs with 1587每13,181 (5478 aver- age) OTUs per sample (Table S1). A number of OTU per sample were similar to or even higher than those reported in previous studies [21, 57]. Based on rarefaction curves, the obtained OTUs in each sediment sample well represented their microbial communities (Fig. S6).
﹛To investigate compositional similarity between samples, we performed OTU-based NMDS analysis. OTU compo- sitions were related to water depth (Fig. 4a) and generally similar along with sediment cores at each station (Fig. 4b). The OTU compositions were signi?cantly differed between the abyssal and hadal sediments (A = 0.11, p < 0.001, MRPP) (Fig. 4c) and structured along the stations (A = 0.31, p < 0.001) (Fig. 4d). Signi?cant associations were also observed with each of the pair of trench and zonation. (A = 0.21, p < 0.001) (Fig. 4e). Unexpectedly, the compositions in the abyssal sediments from the Izu-Ogasawara and Mariana Trench regions largely overlapped. The separation among the hadal sediments related with the different depression trends in porewater nitrate, TOC, and TN con- centrations, but little with porewater oxygen concentration and cell abundance (Fig. S7).
﹛Vertical pro?les of community diversity in the hadal sediment cores were distinct from those of the abyssal cores (Fig. S8). The Shannon, Simpson, and Chao1 index values of all abyssal cores gradually decreased with sediment
depth, while those in hadal samples ?uctuated. Overall, the Shannon and Chao index values in the upper most layers at the abyssal stations were higher than those at the hadal stations.  In  hadal  cores,  index  values  were  decreased at
~5每20 cmbsf and retained or increased below these layers. In all hadal cores from the Izu-Ogasawara Trench, the Shannon index plot showed clear peaks at 8每25 cmbsf and the values were higher than those of the most surface layers. Conversely, in hadal cores from the Mariana Trench, the index values were slightly increased in deep sediment sec- tions (>10 cmbsf), indicating that peaks were possibly located in layers deeper than 30 cmbsf. Interestingly, the diversity was decreased at layers close to those where depletion of oxygen and nitrate occurred (Fig. 2). These trends were concordant with the scattered microbial cell abundances observed in most of the hadal sediments in contrast to the abyssal sediments (Fig. 3). However, those trends were opposed to the general trends that prokaryotic growth and bioactivity are restricted according to sediment depth in energy-limited subsea?oor sediments [48, 58, 59]. Thus, those trends of microbial diversity and cell abundance should be a unique feature of hadal subsurface biosphere. In the cases of gut and freshwater environments, it has been discussed that the supply of fresh nutrient resources gen- erally correlate with microbial  biomass  and  diversity  [60, 61]. According to the proposed theory, the feature of the hadal subsurface biosphere also could be explained by nutrient   supply  (i.e.,  the   deposition  of  relatively  fresh
organic compounds with high sedimentation rate as dis- cussed above). Besides, recent deposition of sediments via landslide could be other potential source of microbial cells that lead to varying diversity with sediment depth.
Taxonomic composition of microbial communities in sediment samples
Among the retrieved OTUs, 76,881 (99.7%) were tax- onomically assigned to eleven Bacterial and two Archaeal phyla. Only 153 OTUs were assigned to Eukarya and the remaining 243 OTUs were taxonomically unassigned. The top  three  and  ten  most  abundant  phyla  accounted  for
>58% and >88%, respectively, of the sequence pool of all sediment samples. The most abundant OTU in the sequencing   pool   belonged  to   Thaumarchaeota, which
represent seven of the top ten OTUs (Fig. S9 and Sup- plementary Data 1).
﹛Overall, Thaumarchaeota (average 23.8%) was the most abundant phylum, followed by Proteobacteria (23.7%), Planctomycetes (10.6%), Chloro?exi (9.6%), Bacteroidetes
(8.0%), Nanoarchaeaeota (6.2%), Acidobacteria (2.5%), Candidatus (Ca.) Atribacteria (1.7%), and Ca. Mar- inimicrobia (1.7%) (Fig. 5). Within sequencing reads assigned to Nanoarchaeaeota, 99.6% were assigned to class Woesearchaeia, currently proposed as novel phylum Ca. Woesearchaeota. Thus, we assigned Nanoarchaeaeota as Woesearchaeota in this study. Within Proteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria (10.3%) is the most abundant class, followed by Alphaproteobacteria (8.4%) and Deltaproteo- bacteria (5.1%) (Fig. S10). In general, the dominant phyla were similar to those of previous studies of abyssal and
hadal sediments [20, 21, 52, 57, 62每64]. The most abundant OTU within Eukarya belonged to Alveolata (41.5%), fol- lowed by Stramenopiles (21.0%), Nucletmycea (19.4%),
Holozoa (11.7%), and Rhizaria (2.2%).
﹛Although dominant phyla were shared among sub- samples within each of the sediment cores, their relative abundance gradually changed with sediment depth (Fig. 5). The relative abundances of Chloro?exi, Woesearchaeota, and Marinimicrobia generally increased in deeper sections (e.g., >8 cmbsf in IO1-2 and >2.5 cmbsf in IOC-2) along with the gradual decreases in oxygen and nitrate con- centrations (Fig. 2). Conversely, Proteobacteria and Thau- marchaeota dominated in shallower sections (e.g., 0每7 cmbsf in IO1-2 and 0每22 cmbsf in MC-2). These trends are similar to previous studies [20, 21, 52, 57, 62, 63] and likely depend on the concentrations of dissolved oxygen and nitrate in sediments. Supporting this, correlation analysis between taxa and geochemistry showed that the abundances of Proteobacteria and Thaumarchaeota were signi?cantly positively correlated with oxygen and nitrate concentra- tions, respectively (Fig. S11 and Supplementary Data 2). Woesearchaeota has been detected from diverse benthic and anaerobic environments [54, 65每68] and harbors genomic capability for fermentation-based metabolism [69]; hence, they may contribute to anaerobic carbon and hydrogen cycles in the deep sea?oor sediments.
﹛We also observed some notable differences in prokar- yotic communities likely associated with geographical location. Distinct community compositions were observed in station JC; Bacteroidetes dominated the communities (average 33.7%), while Thaumarchaeota was relatively scarce (4.1%). Within the Bacteroidetes, Flavobacteriaceae (belonging to class Flavobacteriia) is the most abundant family. The Flavobacterial OTUs abundant in station JC showed low similarity (88.0每91.4%) against Flavobacter- iaceae sp. PRS1, whose genome was reconstructed from the Maria Trench water sample via single cell technique [56]. Because members of Flavobacteriia were reported to be abundant in eutrophic oceans [70], our results likely re?ect eutrophic productivity in the Japan Trench. The pre- dominance of phyla Atribacteria was found  only  in  deeper sections of IO1-1 (15每29 cmbsf), IO1-2 (8每25 cmbsf), and IOC-1 (20每155 cmbsf) hadal stations at the Izu- Ogasawara Trench. Atribacteria is a common lineage in organic rich anaerobic sediments and probably grow with fermentation [71每73]. The higher abundances of Flavo- bacteriia and Atribacteria may represent a substantial deposition of degradable organic compounds into hadal sediments.
﹛The substantial differences revealed in the taxonomic analysis may also be explained by the geomorphological variations among sampling stations. Marinimicrobia showed signi?cant unevenness between cores, with higher
abundances observed in hadal (2.6%) verses abyssal sedi- ments (0.73%) (p < 0.05, U-test, Bonferroni correction). Marinimicrobia is known to be a dominant population in deep sea sediments and seawater, especially in oxygen- minimum zones, and harbors genetic potential of diverse energy metabolic processes using sulfur and nitrogenous compounds as electron donor and acceptor [74每78]. In contrast, Ca. Schekmanbacteria was detected in all abyssal samples (average 0.82%), while there was signi?cantly lower abundance (0.007%) in hadal samples (p < 0.05, U- test, Bonferroni correction). Although several draft gen- omes of the recently proposed phyla Schekmanbacteria were reconstructed by metagenomic approach [79], their biological and geochemical importance remains unclear.
﹛The relative abundance of Thaumarchaeota showed drastic decrease in hadal stations below 6每15 and 20每30 cmbsf in core(s) from the Izu-Ogasawara (IO1-1, IO1-2, IOC-1, and IOC-2) and Mariana (MC-2) Trenches, respectively, where nitrate was consumed and ammonium emerged (Fig. 2). In contrast, low abundance of Thau- marchaeota was continuously observed in sediments from the Japan Trench (JC), where nitrate concentration was depleted through the sediment core (Fig. 2). This was concordant with qPCR analyses (Fig. 3c), as well as pre- vious observations that Thaumarchaeota frequently domi- nated in aerobic sediment columns and radially decreased across the oxic每anoxic transition layer [63, 80]. The most predominant family of Thaumarchaeota in the sediments was Nitrosopumilaceae (92%), which are known to be ammonia oxidizing archaea (AOA) [81每83], and thus may contribute markedly to nitri?cation processes in trench surface sediments. The co-existence of Thaumarchaeota and Marinimicrobia at relatively high abundance suggests the co-existence of nitri?cation and denitri?cation processes, respectively, as described previously [52, 84]. Although abundance of functional genes related with nitri?cation (e.g., amoA) was not analyzed in this study, we should note that abundance of the amoA gene decreased with sediment depth in trench bottom sediments from the Mariana and Izu- Ogasawara Trenches [52, 84].
Co-occurrence network structure of OTUs
Many prokaryotic lineages are known to establish consortia with speci?c prokaryotic members, who inhabit same environment and sometimes sharing similar ecological niches and biological interactions (e.g., sharing metabolic compounds via ?xation and translocating process) [85]. Since co-occurrence patterns can be useful for revealing such concrete but mostly hidden relationships from com- plex community datasets, co-occurrence network analyses have been widely applied to various SSU rRNA tag sequencing datasets of marine and other environments [86每
89]. Here, we conducted co-occurrence analysis to under- stand core metabolic interactions among microbes in trench subsea?oor sediments.
﹛The co-occurrence network showed six clusters com- posed of 3每36 OTUs (66 OTUs in total) and 2每247 edges (Fig. 6). The 66 OTUs represented 23.6% of community compositions in each sample on average. Interestingly, most subnetworks linked to oceanographic zonation (i.e., abyssal and hadal) and sediment depth (Fig. 7 and Supplementary Data 3); OTUs belonging to the largest group A (composed of two subgroups A-1 and A-2) were abundantly detected in the abyssal sediments through the Izu-Ogasawara and Mariana trenches, whilst abundance OTUs in other groups were higher in hadal sediments (i.e., under 10 cmbsf for group B, in shallow sections (0每30 cmbsf) for group C, and above 6 cmbsf for group D). The members of groups E and F were detected from both abyssal and hadal cores.
Although OTUs of groups C and F were spread among the three trenches, those of groups B, D, and E were rare in cores from the Japan Trench.
﹛Groups A and D were dominated by OTUs assigned to order Nitrosopumilales (Fig. S12). Nitrosopumilales are considered as aerobic nitrifying [81每83], and abundance of these OTUs were concordant with the high oxygen and nitrate concentrations in the sediments (Fig. 2). OTUs of group D belonged to one small clade (showing 95.6每96.1% identity with 16S rRNA gene of Nitrosopumilus maritimus SCM1 [DQ085097]) while those of group A were spread throughout the order. The niche separation of AOA sub- groups is regulated by the availability of electron donors like ammonia [19, 90, 91]. Supporting this, the dominance of the group D clade (up to 78.1% in Thaumarchaeota in the hadal samples) is consistent with the enrichment of labile OM in the hadal sediments. Unfortunately, further subgroup
assignment of Thaumarchaeota OTUs using short 16S rRNA gene tag sequences were not technically feasible in contrast to the previously described amoA gene [43]. Although most proteobacterial OTUs in group A were assigned to lineages that currently less well-understood, two OTUs were assigned to genus Woeseia in Chromatiales; this genus likely possesses denitri?cation pathway-related genes [92], and may consume nitrates that provided by nitri?ers including Thaumarchaeota.
﹛Intriguingly, group B consisted of 13 OTUs belonging to ?ve phyla (Planctomycetes, Atribacteria, Chloro?exi, Bac- teroidetes, and Ca. Aerophobetes), and OTUs were abun- dant in the deeper sections where oxygen and nitrate were depleted (Fig. 2). All 13 OTUs showed highest sequence
similarities with uncultured lineages, most of which were found in anaerobic environments with low oxygen con- centrations. Atribacteria partake in fermentation metabo- lisms that produce acetate, hydrogen and carbon dioxide [71每73]. Similar to Atribacteria, recently de?ned bacterial phylum Aerophobetes were reported to harbor saccharolytic and fermentative metabolism capabilities [93]. All Planc- tomycetes OTUs were assigned to order MSBL9. Meta- genome sequencing analyses identi?ed genes encoding pyruvate formate-lyase from a member of MSBL9 [94], indicative of fermentation capabilities. All three Chloro?exi OTUs were assigned to class Dehalococcoidia, which is frequently detected from sea?oor sediments and possesses genes related to hydrogen and sulfur compound oxidation
with reductive dehalogenation of halogenated organic compounds [95每97]. Notably, MSBL9 and Dehalococcoi- dia possess potential of ?avin secretion in marine sediments [98], implying that these lineages also contribute to main- taining extracellular metabolite pools in hadal sediments. The single Bacteroidetes OTU was af?liated with class BD2-2, which may interact with methanotrophic archaea and sulfate-reducing bacteria in methane seep sediments [99]. While knowledge of group B OTUs is still limited, they may cooperatively establish anaerobic metabolic net- works; e.g. products of fermentation by Atribacteria, Aerophobetes, and MSBL9 are used as electron donors by BD2-2 and Dehalococcoidia OTUs, and then the fresh labile OM will be used as energy resources again in hadal sedi- ments following necromass turnover recycling, as discussed previously [100].
﹛Overall, the network structure analyses highlighted associations between prokaryotic consortia and geochem- ical conditions (geomorphological zonation and sediment depth). Part of these consortia may represent potential metabolic interactions with habitat transition, although further experimental validation should be required. In addition, the consortia structures were widespread among the trenches in the northwest Paci?c Ocean. While three groups (B, C, and D) were selectively abundant in the hadal sediments, only one group (A) showed high preference in the abyssal sediments (Fig. 7).
Factors impacting hadal subsea?oor ecosystem
Here, we conducted culture-independent molecular analyses of trans-trench prokaryotic communities in the abyssal plain and hadal trench bottom sediments collected from three  different trench systems under different oceanographical settings to understand the general role of hadal environ- ments on subsurface geochemical cycles and microbial ecosystems. Microbial cell abundance showed greater bio- mass in the hadal sediments verses abyssal sediments especially in deeper layers, which is consistent with pre- vious studies [4, 52, 55]. Although we cannot exclude an impact of water pressure on benthic microbes [101], the clear relations between geochemistry and microbial com- munity at the hadal sediments likely indicating more importance of factors related to geomorphology rather than merely water pressure. Overall, the microbial composition suggested that development of prokaryotic communities depends on ocean geomorphological zonation (i.e., abyssal vs. hadal), geographic regionality (i.e., productivity of overlying ocean surface), and factors associated with sedi- ment depth. We also observed different vertical ?uctuation of microbial community diversity between the hadal and abyssal sediments and identi?ed potential prokaryotic con- sortia that spread among inter每trenches habitats and likely
share energy-conserving metabolic processes in both abys- sal and hadal sediments.
﹛In general, deposition of OM and subsurface microbial cell abundance is related to productivity of the surface ocean and distance from continents or islands [48]. Indeed, in our abyssal sites, greater microbial cell abundance and oxygen consumption were observed in the Izu-Ogasawara compared with Mariana trench regions (Figs. 2 and 3). However, microbial compositions and some geochemical parameters (nitrate, TOC, and TN) were unexpectedly similar between these two regions, indicating that the impact of surface productivity on subsurface microbial community is much smaller than expected in the abyssal plains under oligotrophic to ultraoligotrophic oceans. In the hadal sites, we found variations in geochemical parameters, cell abundances, and microbial compositions along with surface productivities. The differences between the abyssal and hadal sediments cannot only be explained by the ver- tical ?ux of sinking organic particles in?uenced by the ocean surface productivity. To explain the variations, we have two hypotheses. One of them is a presence of hadal currents that could supply intrinsic OM on hadal sites apart from those sinking directly from ocean surface. The other is a difference in sedimentation rates between hadal and abyssal sites that change the impact of ocean surface pro- ductivity on subsurface microbes.
﹛Lateral transport along the trenches is one of the possible sources of OM in hadal trench bottom sediments apart from sinking OM. There are north- and south-ward currents along the trench axis at the Izu-Ogasawara and Japan Trenches, respectively [102, 103]. These currents may contribute to transportation of suspended particles with relatively high OM contents from the north to south. A part of the latitu- dinal gradients in TOC values among hadal sites (Fig. S1) could be explained either by this lateral OM supply, or benthic microbial populations that prefer subsurface eco- systems under eutrophic oceans represented by Atribacteria (Fig. 5). However, we could not ?nd clear geochemical signatures supporting OM delivery along the trenches. Also such currents may contribute for microbial dispersal, growing up the importance to elucidate the water current in abyssal and hadal zones.
﹛OM degradation process at the surface sediments may differ between hadal and abyssal sites due to differences in sedimentation rates, which are very high at hadal while low at abyssal sites. Extremely high sedimentation rates at hadal trench bottom, driven by landslides on trench slope via the funnel effect, cause the rapid deposition of labile OM into the subsurface [9, 55]. This burial prevents oxidative degradation of OM at surface sediments, allowing semi- labile OM to be available to subsurface microbes. In con- trast, abyssal plains generally have slower sedimentation rates. In our studied Izu-Ogasawara Trench sites, estimated
sedimentation rates were 25 and 2.9 cm per 1000 years at the hadal (IOC-2) and abyssal (IOA) stations, respectively, based on bulk 14C-age analysis (Nomaki et al. unpublished data). The slower sedimentation rates at abyssal sites have allowed continuous oxic degradation of OM at surface sediments for over 1000 years, and labile OM are likely more diminished than those at hadal sites. Consequently, the differences in TOC concentrations (0.11每0.55%) were small across the abyssal plains in our sites, while those at the hadal sites varied substantially (0.16每3.28%) (Fig. S1). The variations in TOC concentration among the hadal trench bottom sediments subsequently in?uenced the dis- solved oxygen and nitrate pro?les through sediment depths (Fig. 2). Higher diversity of microbial communities among hadal than abyssal sediments (Fig. 4c) may re?ect variations in TOC and porewater chemistries. Moreover, the differ- ences in labile OM deposition may be re?ected in the microbial cell abundance in the abyssal stations (Fig. 3) instead of microbial community structures.
﹛Our ?ndings provide new perspectives into hadal bio- spheres under different oceanographic regions, displaying contrasting properties to abyssal biospheres. We also iden- ti?ed novel insights into abyssal geochemistry and micro- bial communities whereby variations in surface productivity at abyssal sites are not profound in oligotrophic to ultra- oligotrophic areas because the OM buried into subsurface sediments are extensively degraded before burial. However, we could not specify the factors controlling microbial ecosystems and biogeochemical cycles in this study. To further understand such controlling factors, investigation of microbiological processes in intra- and inter-cell scales and elucidation of biological mechanisms of trench systems that impact hadal biospheres are necessary. In addition, ecolo- gical functions and phylogenetic classi?cations of most predominant lineages in deep sea?oor sediments remain largely unknown. Also, it should be noted that there is still dif?culties in estimation of de?nitive phylogenetic and functional characters in genus or strain level based on the partial SSU rRNA gene sequencing reads. Moreover, although bacteria and archaea may account for a major part of ecosystems, viruses could facilitate biogeochemical cycles through biological interactions with prokaryotes in oligotrophic deep sea environment [100, 104每106]. There- fore, further taxonomic composition analyses, gene- and genome-centric approaches (e.g., metagenomics, metatran- scriptomics, and metaepigenomics [107]), and integrative analyses with viruses (e.g., viromics) will provide further insights into microbial ecology and associated biogeo- chemical cycles.
