1. Introduction 
Current trends in composite manufacturing technologies for the aerospace industry are focussed on the automatic deposition of composite tapes and new multi-component materials systems, such as toughened prepregs, for improved component perfor-mance, damage tolerance or added functionality. The automation and material technologies enabling these advances have pro-gressed much further than the capability to understand, predict, and optimise the manufacturing processes [1,2]. As a result, even though automatic .bre deposition technologies promise higher manufacturing rates, in practice lack of understanding of the pre-preg behaviour often leads to limited improvement in laydown rates. The complexities in processing present a high risk of defect generation and requires substantial investments in empirical optimisation. 
Two of the main technologies for automated deposition of pre-preg material are Automated Tape Laying (ATL) and Automated Fibre Placement (AFP) [3每5]. The two techniques use very similar machines, consisting of a computer-controlled poly-articulated robot, with a placement head that lays bands of prepreg strips onto a mould in order to construct the layup (Fig. 
1). ATL is employed to 
. Corresponding author. E-mail address: jonathan.belnoue@bristol.ac.uk 
(J.P.-H. Belnoue). 
deliver wide prepreg tapes onto a surface whilst automatically removing the ply backing and is well adapted for the manufactur-ing of large parts of relatively simple geometry, e.g. an aircraft wing skin. AFP is similar to ATL but utilises narrow prepreg strips 
(the width of which can vary from 18 to 12 ), which are collimated on the head and then delivered together. As narrower tapes can steer over sharply curved surfaces better than wider tapes (that cannot be placed without buckling some of the .bres), AFP can be used to manufacture much more complex geometries e.g. wing spar C sections. In order to obtain good layup quality, it is essential to control all the process parameters (heating temperature, com-paction pressure, placement speed, etc) [6每10] 
and the machine trajectories. Over the years, design rules have been implemented to optimise these trajectories for maximum .nal mechanical prop-erties (stiffness and strength) of the component being constructed [11,12]. This is, however, insuf.cient to ensure the production of defect free components as the tolerance in the .bre placement head movement, steered .bres, and tow width variation all con-tribute to the introduction of gaps and overlaps within the lami-nate [3,13]. In addition, the optimisation process of the machine trajectory can itself be responsible for the introduction of further defects. What is not often taken into account in manufacturing practices and analysis of such defects is that the in.uence on .nal .bre path and ply geometry from gaps and overlaps is not their nominal as-deposited position, but a function of what happens to 
1359-835X/ 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Fig. 1. (a) An AFP machine laying into a female mould [3] 
每 (b) Automated .bre placement head, redrawn from [11]. 
Unlabelled image
the laminate in the subsequent processes, such as debulking or consolidation. The through-thickness deformation of the laminate with the gaps or overlapping tapes may lead to an additional .bre crimp or wrinkles, which can have a major impact on composite properties. 
In recent years there have been a number of experimental and numerical studies carried out to predict and characterise the knockdown effect of gaps and overlaps on .nal mechanical proper-ties of components manufactured by AFP. Amongst others, Sawicki and Minguet [14] 
have shown the reduction of compressive strength of samples with various distributions and sizes of gaps in 90 plies; Turoski [15] 
studied the knockdown effect under both tensile and compressive loading of isolated and interacting gaps with different stagger repeats; Croft et al. [16] 
investigated the effect of tensile, compressive and in-plane shear loading on the strength of laminates with a gap, an overlap and a half gap/overlap embedded in the through-thickness symmetry plane; and Elsher-bini and Hoa [17] 
showed similar trends with respect to fatigue loading. More recently, Li et al. [18] 
generated sophisticated mesh-ing tools which allowed them to easily create a series of .nite ele-ment models with various combinations and permutations of gaps and overlaps. They were, then, able to systematically investigate the in.uence of defect size and distribution on the strength knock-down of the modelled specimens. The main conclusion of all these studies was that the introduction of gaps and overlaps during the layup process results (after consolidation and curing of the lami-nate) in the introduction of out-of-plane waviness of the load bear-ing 0 plies (i.e. wrinkles) adjacent to the gapped or overlapped layers and to local thickness variation which, in turn, are responsi-ble for the decreased mechanical properties. This was later con-.rmed by Lan et al. [19,20] 
who showed that the use of a caul plate favours resin .ow thus leading to reduced thickness variation and improved mechanical properties. 
To limit the variation in strength of composite components made by automated manufacturing, it is absolutely imperative to establish more clearly how wrinkle severity and thickness varia-tion can be reduced and, in the best case scenario, mitigate against it. With application to ATL of thermoplastic-based systems, Wang and Gutowski [21] 
studied analytically the possibility to remove (through processing) gaps and laps embedded in a lay-up. Although these studies were very informative, the authors only considered a very idealised geometry where the overlaps were described as cubical blocks of material superimposed with each other. Moreover, the evolution under processing conditions of only one embedded defect (i.e. one gap or one overlap) was considered. A real component manufactured by AFP, however, contains a very large number of different and complex combinations and permuta-tions for gaps and overlaps, which can be of different sizes. A full exploration of the possibility to mitigate, through processing, defects in realistic engineering structure laid-up by AFP would therefore necessitate a very large and costly test plan. In compar-ison, composite process modelling offers the possibility to test a much larger range of possible combinations in a virtual sense and to optimise the processing parameters in order to minimise the defect sizes in a cured component. Process modelling could also advantageously replace or at least reduce empirical methods 
and imaging techniques (which necessitates specimen/com-ponent manufacture) [22,23] 
for the generation of the internal ply geometry that is used as input to failure models. This would open the way for a fully virtual optimisation and strength predic-tion tool for composite components produced by AFP. 
Most of the models available in the literature for the .ow of resin in beds of reinforcement are based on Darcy＊s law [24,25]. These methods work very well to describe the evolution of the average thickness and .bre volume fraction in a large piece of pre-preg when the edge effects can be neglected [26每29]. The principal modelling assumption is that bleeding .ow (i.e. the pressure gradi-ent causes resin .ow relative to the .bre) is the main mechanism leading to the thickness variation of the laminate when processed. This is however not always fully representative as it has been known for a number of years [30] 
that squeezing .ow (i.e. the lam-inate behaves as a highly viscous incompressible .uid) can also occur. Recently, Nixon-Pearson et al. [31] 
have shown that this can greatly affect the deformability of toughened thermoset pre-preg under compaction. They highlighted that the smaller a pre-preg volume with unconstrained boundaries (external or internal as in the case of tapes with gaps), the bigger the effect of squeezing .ow on thickness evolution. This is important for the study of the consolidation of laminate produced by AFP as unconstrained nar-row strips of prepreg and gapped and overlapped regions can locally affect the tape thickness to width ratio. This has been shown [31] 
to greatly in.uence the deformability of prepreg stacks. Hence, numerical tools for consolidation-induced deforma-tion of laminate produced by AFP need to be able to capture these phenomena. The model recently proposed by Belnoue et al. [32] 
takes account of both bleeding and squeezing .ow. It was shown to predict accurately the evolution of thickness and width over time of laminates subjected to complex pressure and pressure rate cycles. It is also able to capture some of the interesting experimen-tally observed effects [31] 
such as the convergence to a compaction limit at high temperature and high pressure or the size effects observed in the through-thickness and transverse deformation of prepreg stacks under compaction. 
The aim of the present study is to gain a better understanding of the way gaps and overlaps, which are introduced during auto-mated prepreg layup, evolve during processing and promote the development of .bre path defects and thickness variation. As in-situ testing and observation of the evolution of the ply structure in the course of processing is not possible, another advantage of the modelling is that it gives information on how the plies move in relation to each other during the layup consolidation and resin cure. In the .rst part of this paper the model for the consolidation of toughened prepreg under processing conditions [32] 
is coupled to an existing cure simulation model, which allows to describe the full cure cycle. Validation of the updated models is given for struc-turally simple but internally complex test cases, comparing .nite element (FE) predictions with experimental data. The second part of the paper focuses more closely on the processing of gaps and overlaps introduced during the layup process. 
2. Modelling tools 
The main novelty of the modelling approach is the use of the consolidation model for toughened prepreg presented in Belnoue et al. [32]. In order to be able to model the full cure cycle, the con-solidation model is here coupled to cure simulation models that are well established in the literature [33,34]. The models are brie.y summarized separately before their combination is presented in Section 2.3. The framework is then validated by simple test cases. The full list of the material parameters used throughout the study can be found at https://data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/x9rik93lx3tp 
1yeup4pe8kbti. 
2.1. Consolidation model 
The .ow-compaction model used here follows directly from Belnoue et al. [32] 
where more details are given. Only the main model assumptions and equations are summarised. One of the model＊s main feature is that it is capable of accounting for both squeezing and bleeding .ow. This is important for the modelling of toughened prepreg as they have been shown [31] 
to exhibit hybrid behavior between what would be expected from a thermo-plastic based prepreg system (e.g. the variation of the material response with the tape width and thickness) and what is usually observed for thermosetting systems (e.g. the existence of a com-paction limit). 
The model uses the general thermodynamical framework pro-posed by Limbert and Middleton [35] 
for transversely isotropic solids. Although the framework was .rst formulated for the descrip-tion of soft biological tissues (muscles), it is very relevant for the description of uncured prepreg as both materials are highly viscous and present one strong direction of anisotropy. It is assumed that the general thermodynamic potential, w, is additively decomposed into an elastic part (w e which is related here to the deformation of .bres) 
and a viscous part (w related to the .ow of matrix). Noting C the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, we can then express the second the Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor as: 
where C denotes the derivative of C with respect to the time. 
The expression of the elastic potential follows from Bonet and Burton [10]. 
where 1 is the second-order unit tensor, I1 .1 : C, 
The material parameters a, b, k, lT and lL in Eq. (2) 
can all be expressed as a function of the engineering constants. N0 is the structural tensor which characterizes the local directional proper-ties of the material and is de.ned as N0 .n0 n0 (where n0 is the .bre orientation). 
The expression for w follows from a phenomenological model proposed in [32] 
which builds on the work by Rogers [36] 
and Kelly [37]. Based on experimental results, the existence of a transition mechanism between squeezing (typically at low temperature and low pressure) and bleeding .ow was postulated. This transition mechanism was thought to be related to what many authors have described in the past as locking, which corresponds to the point in time when the .bre bed reaches a con.guration that is such that it cannot deform transverse to the .bres and transverse to the load-ing direction anymore. It was further assumed that after locking a change of direction of the resin .ow between the .bres takes place, from transverse squeezing to bleeding. To ensure a smooth transi-tion between the two mechanisms, squeezing .ow theories were used in both cases. In other words, bleeding was mathematically represented as squeezing along the .bres. 
Another consequence of this idealisation was that, unlike tradi-tional .ow models for thermosets prepreg which use Darcy＊s .ow, the model assumed that the apparent viscosity of a piece of pre-preg subjected to pure compressive loading could be multiplica-tively decomposed into the product of a strain rate dependent term (assumed to behave as power law .uid) and a strain depen-dent term [37]. 
To capture the deformation of a prepregs with an anisotropic Stokes .ow, a model would have to be de.ned at sub-ply resolu-tion and a .ne mesh through thickness of the plies would have to be used [31,38]. This is not practical for the simulation at a com-ponent scale. To overcome this dif.culty a multiscale approach was used. As a result, the strain dependent term was further mul-tiplicative decomposed into a component pertaining to the macro-scale deformation of the tape and a term (at the micro scale) expressing the evolution the inter-.bre channels. All this develop-
ment .nally leads to the formulation of two expressions for w . Prior to locking, the transverse behavior of the material is con-
trolled by the viscous potential given in Eq. (3). After locking, w is expressed as in Eq. (4). In both these equations, J2 is the strain 
rate invariant de.ned as J2 .12 e1 : C2T. 
and 
are known a priori as they are linked to the geometry of the tape and of the unit cell. l0, w0 and h0 are the initial tape length (i.e. along the .bre direction), width and thickness respectively. Whilst vl and vf are the aspect ratios of a unit cell at locking and at the compaction limit respectively and d is the size of the .bres in the plane perpendicular to the .bre direction. Therefore, one of the most elegant aspects of the model is that it can describe the transverse behaviour of prepreg under processing conditions at constant temperature with 3 parameters only. The parameters a and b are two power law parameters con-trolling the behaviour of the rate dependent term of the apparent viscosity whilst the parameter k controls the size of the inter-.bre channels at the micro-scale. As shown in [32], these parame-ters can be easily determined by .tting straight lines through experimental data on a log每log plot of simple compaction tests performed on cruciform shaped samples. 
2.2. Cure simulation model 
A cure simulation model was developed and implemented using the commercial Finite Element Analysis code Abaqus/Stan-dard. The simulation addresses the heat transfer effects occurring during the cure process and allows for quanti.cation of the tem-perature and degree of cure evolution of the manufactured part. The model is three-dimensional and transient and has been applied to the Hexcel IM7/8552 prepreg material used in this study. The material properties depend on both the degree of cure and temper-ature and the material sub-models of cure kinetics, thermal con-ductivity and speci.c heat capacity were implemented in the user de.ned subroutine UMATHT. The heat transfer solution appropriate for simulating the cure process can be expressed by a three-dimensional energy balance combined with Fourier＊s heat conduction law and incorporating the exothermic heat generated due to the chemical reaction of the resin as follows [39]: 
@Ter; TT da 
qcp .r KrTer; TTtvr q HT e5T 
@t rdt 
Here q and cp are the density and the speci.c heat capacity of the composite, respectively, K is the thermal conductivity tensor, T the temperature, t and r the time and spatial coordinate and a the degree of cure. The rate of heat generation due to cure is expressed as the product of the resin volume fraction vr , the den-sity of the resin q , the total heat of reaction HT and the cure reac-
tion rate da=dt. 
The cure kinetics model used for the resin system of this study is a combination of a nth order model and an autocatalytic model [34]. The speci.c heat capacity is de.ned based on the rule of mix-tures for the relevant volume fraction of .bres and matrix whilst a geometry-based model is implemented to compute the thermal conductivity [34]. The .bres＊ speci.c heat capacity and thermal conductivity present a linear dependence on temperature [33], whilst the resin speci.c heat capacity and thermal conductivity depend on both degree of cure and temperature [34]. 
2.3. Thermo-mechanical model 
A coupled three-dimensional transient thermo-mechanical model was developed by coupling the consolidation model and the cure simulation model presented in Sections 2.1 
and 
2.2. Again, the coupled model was developed within the implicit FE package Abaqus/Standard. A staggered solution approach is adopted (see Fig. 
2). The heat transfer analysis is carried out .rst, followed by the mechanical analysis. As described in Section 2.2 
the heat trans-fer solution is coded within a UMATHT subroutine yielding the evolution of temperature and degree of cure of the laminate. This information is then passed to a UMAT subroutine where the mechanical model described in Section 2.1 
is coded. The coupling between the heat transfer solution and the consolidation model is carried out by expressing the consolidation phenomenological parameters a; b and k as a function of temperature [32]. The ther-mal and chemical strains occurring during the process cycle are taken into account by considering the thermal expansion [40] 
and cure shrinkage coef.cients [41] 
of the material. In addition, the fact that consolidation stops at gelation, is deployed numeri-cally by assigning a very large apparent viscosity gapp after the 
resin gels, i.e. when the instantaneous degree of cure a reaches the degree of cure at gelation agel. The degree of cure at gelation agel for the resin system of this study is 0.33 [41]. 
2.4. Model validation 
2.4.1. Cure simulation model validation 
To validate the cure simulation model, an 18 mm thick .at panel was cured within an autoclave. The .at panel was placed on a 10 mm aluminium tooling plate, bagged up and sealed before testing. A K-type thermocouple was mounted at the centre of the laminate in order to record the temperature evolution of the lam-inate during the process. The nominal cure pro.le [42] 
of the 8552 resin system was applied whilst the lay-up of the laminate was [0/90]37s. The cure of an 18 mm thick .at panel was then modelled using the developed cure simulation model and the results were compared with the experimental data. The widely accepted mate-rial properties of aluminium were applied to the tool. Hence, the thermal conductivity and the speci.c heat capacity were set at 120 [W/m/.C] and 960 [J/kg/.C], respectively, whereas the density was .xed at 2700 kg/m3. The heat convection coef.cients for the given autoclave were determined experimentally using lumped mass thermal analysis. It was shown that the heat convection coef-.cients of the top and bottom surfaces were 27.3 and 31.7 [W/m2/ K], respectively. In addition, adiabatic conditions were applied at the lateral walls of the laminate assuming no heat loss due to the high width to thickness ratio. 
Fig. 
3 
presents the temperature evolution and the degree of cure at the centre of the laminate. As it can been seen there is a very good agreement between the experimental data and simulation results implying that the cure simulation model developed is able to simulate the heat transfer phenomena occurring during the cure process of the material system of this study successfully. The tem-perature lag between the centre of the laminate and the autoclave air is due to the heat convection between the autoclave and the 
200 
1 applied pressure. Fig. 
5a depicts the heat transfer results for the two case studies. The evolution of both the degree of cure and tem-
180 
0.9 
perature is identical between the two con.gurations since the lay-
160 
0.8 up does not affect the heat transfer in the through-the thickness 140 
0.7 direction. In addition, there is no temperature and degree of cure 
Temperature at centre of laminate - experiment Autoclave air -experiment Temperature at centre of laminate - simula on Degree of cure at centre of laminate - simula on  
Temperature [C] 
Degreee of cure 
distribution within the laminates due to the fact that the laminates 
are relatively thin (2 mm). Furthermore, there is no heat loss 
between the hot plates and the laminates since they are in direct 
contact. In the beginning of the cycle consolidation effects domi-
nate, leading to a considerable thickness reduction until the thick-
ness reaches a plateau at the middle of the second ramp where the 
resin has gelled and cure shrinkage strains start to develop. This 
phenomenon is accurately captured by the model since the degree 
shown in Fig. 
5a. The increase of temperature during the second 
ramp results in a slight increase in thickness caused by thermal expansion effects followed by a slight decrease due to resin chem-ical shrinkage. During the second dwell there is no variation in thickness whereas there is a slight thickness reduction at the end of the cycle during cool-down caused by thermal contraction. 
Overall, there is a quite good agreement between the experimental 
Time [hr] 
Fig. 3. Cure of 18 mm thick IM7/8552 .at panel; evolution of temperature and degree of cure at the centre of the laminate. 
laminate as well as due to the low thermal conductivity in the 
through the thickness direction. 
2.4.2. Thermo-mechanical model validation 
data and the simulation results (see Fig. 
5b) implying that the cou-pled model is capable of capturing the thickness evolution during consolidation, accounting for the cessation of compaction at gel
A series of experiments were carried out in order to validate the and also thermal expansion effects. Furthermore, it is shown that developed thermo-mechanical model. The cruciform specimen the model can capture the layup size effects; the CP laminate developed in [31] 
was used for the layup and geometry. Two differ-shows less thickness reduction than the BP laminate due to the fact 
ent con.gurations of 16 plies laminates were studied; cross-ply (CP), [0/90]8 and blocked-ply (BP), [904/04/904/04] as shown in Fig. 
4a. The experimental testing was carried out using an Instron 8801 universal testing machine with temperature controlled hot plates transferring the temperature and pressure pro.le to the samples (see Fig. 
4b). The nominal temperature and pressure pro-.le from the manufacturers recommended cure cycle were applied. The coupled thermo-mechanical model presented in Section 2.3 
was used to model the compaction of the two samples and the results were compared with the experimental data. Prescribed temperature boundary conditions were applied to all the bottom and top nodes of the model representing the hot plates, whilst pre-scribed pressure was applied to all the top nodes representing the 
a) 
that the apparent viscosity is proportional to the width to thick-ness ratio rendering the CP laminate considerably more viscous [31]. 
3. Wrinkle formation 每 AFP gaps and overlaps 
3.1. Sample design and experimental procedure 
In order to validate further the .ow model and coupled approach and to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in the consolidation of gaps and overlaps introduced dur-ing the Automated Fibre Placement lay-up process, a sample with a 
b) 

Cure Time [hr] Cure Time [hr] 
Fig. 5. (a) Heat transfer solution for cross ply and blocked ply laminate, (b) coupled solution for cross ply and blocked ply laminate. 
a) b) 

Fig. 6. Gaps and overlaps specimen (a) Ply book, (b) CT scan after vacuum consolidation, (c) Initial geometry for the FE analysis, obtained through forming of the plies initially laid-up ＆＆.at§ (see Fig. 
6a), (d) Realistic internal ply geometry in the FE model of the uncompacted sample after the forming phase. 
purposely severe combination of gaps and overlaps was designed and manufactured from broadgoods IM7/8552. As illustrated in Fig. 
6(a), the sample is a 100 mm 100 mm 6 mm with a cross-ply layup in which 3 defect areas are embedded in the 90 plies. Each of these defect areas is made of 5 gaps stacked on top of each other, directly above a stack of 5 overlaps. In the central defect region, the order of the gaps and overlaps regions are the opposite to the outer two regions. All the defects are 2 mm wide, which is of the same order of magnitude as defects introduced by an AFP process. Fig. 
6(b) shows a CT scan of the centre-line of a specimen that has been vacuum-bagged and then oven-cured for imaging purposes. 
The samples described above were submitted to two different types of thermomechanical loading. First, isothermal experiments were carried out at 70 C. The laminates were loaded at a rate of 
2.333 
kPa s 1 to 1 bar, 3 bars and 7 bars respectively and then maintained at these levels of pressure over 1 h. An Instron 8801 universal testing machine with temperature controlled hot plates was used to apply the temperature and pressure pro.le to the sam-ples. The obtained samples were then fully cured in an oven (with-out pressure) and micrographs were taken. The second test program used the same equipment to load the sample under the pressure and temperature cycle recommended by the manufac-turer [42], mimicking an autoclave curing process. 
3.2. 
Isothermal loading 
Although there is no composite manufacturing process that uses the load and temperature program applied in the isothermal tests, the levels of load and temperature were carefully chosen to be meaningful from a composite processing perspective. Thus, 70 C is close to the hot debulking temperature, 1 bar is equivalent to vacuum pressure, 3 bar is close to the pressure applied by an AFP roller and 7 bar is the autoclave pressure. These tests were carried out with 2 main objectives: 
to give further validation for the .ow model presented in Bel-noue et al. [32] 
for larger samples with more complex internal ply geometry to gain more understanding of the way gaps and overlaps con-solidate and interact during the consolidation process and the mechanisms involved. 
FE models of the tests described above were set up in Abaqus/ Standard. A ply-by-ply modelling approach was used. The neces-sity to start with an accurate geometry of the uncompacted speci-men led to the de.nition of a two-step modelling procedure. The .rst step consisted in the forming of the plies laid-up .at, as in Fig. 
6(a). As illustrated in Fig. 
6(c), this was done using a rigid plate that was moved down in order to progressively bring the plies into contact with each other. The 3 bumps observed on the sample top at the position of each of the defect areas (see Fig. 
6b), were repro-duced by placing 3 slits in the forming plate through which the material can penetrate. The good agreement between the FE model and a CT scan of a specimen that had been vacuum bagged and then oven cured with no pressure applied on the specimen (as can be seen comparing Fig. 
6(d) with Fig. 
6(b)) validated the choice of the forming procedure. The second part of the analysis consisted in the compaction of the samples between 2 rigid plates. In all the simulations, the material model for pre-preg was that from [32]. Custom-developed algorithms allowed for automatic mesh gener-ation and material property assignment from direct reading of the ply book. Single integration point elements with hourglass control were used, with one element per ply in the thickness direction. 
Fig. 7. Comparison of FE predictions with experimental results for the isothermal experiments. (a) Thickness vs Time evolution of the sample tested a 7 bar, (b) Experimental and predicted thicknesses of the samples tested at respectively 1 bar, 3 bar and 7 bar, (c) Micrograph of the defect area in the middle of the sample at 7 bar, (d) FE prediction for the internal ply geometry around a central defect region of the sample with a 7 bar applied pressure. 
As illustrated by Fig. 
7(a) and (b), the predicted thickness evolu-tion for the 3 levels of pressure compared very well with those measured experimentally. Similarly, good agreement is obtained when comparing samples＊ micrographs (Fig. 
7c) with the .nal ply geometry predicted by the model (Fig. 
7d). Both the ply thick-ness and the level of .lling of the gaps originally introduced in the sample are very well captured by the model. However, the pre-dicted wrinkle angle ( 15 in the sample tested at 7 bars) is more severe than what is observed in the micrographs ( 10). There are several possible explanations for this. Firstly, the model does not take account of the resin once it has bled out of the .bre bed into the gap. This potentially resists the development of the wrinkle. Secondly, as can be seen in Fig. 
6(b) and contrary to what is assumed in the model, the gaps (in the real samples) are not per-fectly aligned. This makes it more dif.cult for the wrinkle to develop. Lastly, as it has been shown in the context of dry .bre fab-ric forming [43], the bending stiffness can considerably affect the severity of the wrinkle. The present model was formulated for pre-diction of consolidation, with the value of the bending stiffness taken directly from Sj.lander et al. [44]. There a cantilever bending test was performed at 70 C on a piece of prepreg made from epoxy resin and IM .bres. The bending stiffness in an FE model of the test was adjusted until the predictions matched the experimental results. Sj.lander et al. [44] 
reported the dif.culty to calibrate this property properly. This suggests that, in the future, more effort should be dedicated to more clearly understanding the bending behavior of prepreg sheets under processing conditions. 
Fig. 
8, shows the initial con.guration and the .nal geometry predictions of the internal ply geometry around the central wrinkle for the 3 different pressure levels. As expected, most of the varia-tion of the thickness happens between 0 and 1 bar. The .gure high-lights the existence of two competing mechanisms in the way the gaps originally introduced within the laminates are .lled. Upon compaction, the gaps can either close due to the overlaps falling into the gaps (the wrinkle then becomes steeper) or they can be .lled laterally due to squeezing .ow (this prevents the wrinkle angle from increasing as can be seen at the position marked ＆a＊ on the sample loaded to 7 bars). Including capabilities for squeez-ing .ow into the model also allowed to take account of the higher compressibility of the overlapped areas. It can be clearly seen in the 7 bar sample that these regions are compacted nearly twice as much as the single plies. This was also observed on the micro-graphs of the samples (Fig. 
7c). 
3.3. Full cure cycle 
The second set of experiments, where the same apparatus was used to submit the sample to the manufacturer＊s recommended pressure and temperature cycle, was used to validate the two-step coupled thermo-mechanical model proposed in Section 2.3. The same material parameters as in Section 2.4.2 
and the same ini-tial mesh as Section 3.2 
were used. First, the temperature history at every gauss point in the model was calculated during the heat transfer analysis (which uses the UMATHT subroutine). This showed that, the temperature distribution through the thickness of the laminate was negligible with a slight temperature overshoot, in the order of two degrees at the beginning of the second dwell. The temperature .eld history was then given as an input to the mechanical analysis (which uses the UMAT subroutine). Fig. 
9(a) depicts the thickness evolution of the laminate, whilst Fig. 
9(b) presents a micrograph and the corresponding simulation result. It can be observed that the coupled model is able to predict the thickness evolution of the laminate during consolidation accu-rately. Comparison of the simulation results with the micrograph 
Fig. 8. Prediction for the internal ply geometry around the central wrinkle at different level of pressure. 
9(b) indicates that the coupled model predicts the morphology of the manufactured part successfully, including the .lling of the gaps as well as the formation and position of the wrin-kle. As with the isothermal experiments, the model slightly over-predicts the magnitude of the formed wrinkle. 
4. 
Although very informative about the mechanisms playing a role in the consolidation of gaps and overlaps, the study presented in the previous section was a rather simple and forced case compared to a real lay-up created by AFP. For example, the probability to see, 5 gaps facing exactly opposite to 5 overlaps is quite low. Moreover, in the industry AFP machines tends to be set-up so that they leave only gaps or only overlaps in the layup. The model＊s ability to pre-dict the effect of consolidation and curing on more realistic lay-ups with more complex distribution and a greater number of gaps and overlaps is presented. 
Two different lay-up con.gurations were modelled (see Fig. 
10). As for the previous section, a cross-ply con.guration was adopted. Both lay-ups had the same defect distribution but one of them only contained gaps whilst the other one only had overlaps. The defect width was 2 mm, which is consistent with the size of the defects 
Fig.10.Plybooksforthelayupswithacomplexdistributionofmanufacturingdefects.(a)100%overlaps每(b)100%gaps.a) 
mm7.4
b) 
gaps. 
introduced in an AFP process. The same modelling procedure as the one described in the previous section was used except that the laminate that contained only gaps did not need to be formed. The samples were assumed to be in.nitely long in the two in-plane directions therefore only a representative unit cell with fully constrained edges was modelled. Temperature and pressure boundary conditions were applied to simulate the samples being subjected to the cure cycle. It was assumed that the samples were consolidated between 2 aluminium plates, which were modelled as rigid bodies. The material parameters were the same as those used throughout the paper, given in Section 2. 
The results of the analysis are illustrated in Fig. 
11. Comparing the .nal internal geometry of the lay-up where only overlaps were introduced and the case with 100% gaps reveals signi.cant differ-ences between the 2 cases. The sample with 100% overlaps is about 
0.7 mm thicker. In addition, there is signi.cantly more .bre wavi-ness created in this sample. This is important from a design point of view as the level of .bre waviness can, as discussed in the intro-duction, impact the sample load carrying capacity greatly, whilst the sample thickness has implications for assembly tolerances. In the model there is a ＆void＊ formed at the top surface where the plies have deformed. In reality, this would be .lled by resin bleed, which can not be captured by the analysis. This may however be an artefact of the excessive ply bending, which was observed in the examples in Section 3. The difference in thickness observed between the two cases is partly due to the sample with embedded overlaps being originally thicker, as a result of the introduction of extra material in the overlapped regions. However as can be seen in Fig. 
11, it is also due to the samples with embedded gaps being able to compact more. This can mainly be explained by the fact that in the samples with embedded overlaps the plies are continu-ous (i.e. in.nitely long). It was shown in [31] 
that the higher the square of the ply thickness to width (i.e. dimension in the direction perpendicular to the .bre direction) ratio, the greater the amount of squeezing .ow and the more the material is able to compact. It can also be remarked that, contrary to what might be expected, there is almost no waviness in the samples with embedded gaps. This is because the samples gels very early on in the cure cycle, which results in the structure being ＆＆frozen§ and unable to deform any more. 
It is also interesting to remark that unlike what was observed in the case presented in Section 3 
where a sample with a deliberately bad combination of gaps and overlaps was analysed, lateral squeezing .ow does not seem to help to .ll up the gaps (see Fig. 
11b). This is because in the present case the ply thickness to width ratio is much smaller, thus limiting the ability of the mate-rial to squeeze. In this example, counterintuitively, the introduc-tion of gaps in the 90 plies compared to the overlaps has helped to increase the overall .bre volume fraction of the sample, since it is able to consolidate more easily. In the case of the overlaps, they cause the top tooling to be held up, preventing overall consol-idation of the un-overlapped regions. 
Finally, in order to demonstrate the model＊s ability to study dif-ferent manufacturing cases, an analysis where the hard top tooling was replaced by a soft vacuum bag was carried out (in practice a homogeneous pressure was applied to the top of the samples). The result of the analysis is illustrated in Fig. 
12. In the sample with embedded overlaps (see Fig. 
12(a)), soft tooling results in a lot less compaction than what was observed with hard tooling (see Fig. 
11 
(a)). This is the result of the applied pressure being non-homogeneously distributed when hard tooling is used. In fact, in the hard tooling case, the compacting plate is only in contact with the bumps at the surface of the sample. As a result, the force applied at the top of the tool is distributed over a much smaller area and the actual pressure applied on some parts of the lay-up is much greater than the external pressure applied to the rigid tool. This also results in much reduced waviness in the lay-up consoli-dated and cured under hard tooling. This is in good agreement with the observations made by Lan et al. [19,20] 
when studying the effect of tooling on the resistance to failure of samples containing gaps and overlaps. 
5. Conclusion 
This work has presented new insight into the formation of .bre path defects arising in AFP manufactured laminates, through experimental observations and predictive modelling. To achieve this a new multi-scale and multi-physics modelling framework for composite processing, based on a consolidation model pro-posed by Belnoue et al. [32] 
has been de.ned. Using a method pre-sented by Johnston et al. [33], the consolidation model was coupled to a heat transfer model for accurate description of the full cure cycle. Validation of the newly introduced models was .rst given for very simple test cases comparing FE predictions with experi-mental data. This model was then applied to analysis of the pro-cessing of specimens with gaps and overlaps introduced during the layup process and for the understanding of how these layup defects can evolve into .bre path defects. 
A specimen was designed with a purposely ＆＆bad§ combination of gaps and overlaps of realistic sizes. This magni.ed the effect of the different mechanisms participating in the gaps and overlaps consolidation and closure, thus facilitating their identi.cation. Samples were laid-up and processed in 2 different ways: isother-mally, subjected to 3 different pressure levels and following the manufacturer＊s recommended cure cycle (mimicking that of an autoclave). Micrographs of samples and measurement of the .nal thickness allowed further model validation. This highlighted the model＊s ability to capture the mechanisms leading to the .nal ply con.guration. Upon compaction, the gaps can either close due to the overlaps falling into the gaps or be .lled laterally due to squeezing .ow. Comparison between the model predictions and this set of experiments also highlighted the necessity for fur-ther investigation, in the future, at the effect of the ply bending stiffness on the wrinkle severity and to explore new methods to take this into account more accurately within the modelling frame-work proposed here. 
In the last part of the paper it was shown how the newly devel-oped numerical tool can be used to predict the evolution of the internal geometry and ply con.guration of components containing much more complex and realistic arrangements of gaps and over-laps. The emphasis has been put on predicting the effect of tooling on the samples＊ .nal internal geometry. It highlighted the effect of the plies＊ dimensions on the ability of the layup to compact. As much as 10% difference in the predicted thickness was obtained between the thickest specimen that contained the most severe waviness (100% overlaps with soft tooling) and the thinnest one (100% gaps with hard tooling). 
The new predictive capabilities developed here opens the way towards process optimisation and defect mitigation in parts man-ufactured by automated prepreg lay-up. For example, a sensitivity analysis on the material and processing parameters would help to limit the amount of part re-work and scrap by improving the gen-eral understanding of how manufacturing conditions affect the quality of the laminate. In addition, the modelling framework pre-sented in this study can be enhanced to predict residual stress and shape distortion occurring during the cure so that all the phenom-ena occurring during the manufacturing process of composites can be captured. It also holds potential to be used as part of a virtual framework for the prediction of the mechanical properties of engi-neering components made from composite materials, including the formation and effects of .bre path defects. 
Acknowledgements 
This work has been funded by the UK Engineering Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) Centre for Innovative Manufac-turing in Composites project ＆＆Defect Generation Mechanisms in Thick and Variable Thickness Composite Parts 每 Understanding, Predicting and Mitigation§ (DefGen), [EP/I033513/1]. Data for the cure simulations models, including equations and materials parameters can be found at https://data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/ 
x9rik93lx3tp1yeup4pe8kbti. 
