International Journal of Fatigue 

Single-Gear-Tooth Bending Fatigue of HDPE reinforced with short natural fiber
Philippe Blais, Lot. Toubal. 

Innovations Institute in Ecomaterials, Ecoproducts and Ecoenergies 每 Biomass Based, Mechanical Engineering Department, Universit谷 du Qu谷bec 角 Trois-Rivi豕res, 3351 boul. des Forges, Trois-Rivi豕res G9A 5H7, Canada 
ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT 
Keywords: 
Fatigue Short natural .ber High density polyethylene Single gear tooth Life prediction
ABSTRACT
In this study, the mechanical behavior of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) reinforced with short natural .ber was evaluated using a test bench designed to monitor the high-cycle bending-fatigue characteristics of gear teeth. High-resolution imaging and acoustic emission (AE) were used to document crack initiation and propa-gation against the number of cycles for all specimens. Fatigue versus number of cycles was modeled using S每N curves, damage indices and a linearized Weibull distribution. Correlations between the variables are discussed and compared with published data. Crack progression, residual load, and AE show consistent results that track the progressive damage to the material. 
INTRODUCTION
1. Introduction 
Developers of new materials can no longer ignore the impact that these will have on the environment. Product life expectancy, the quantity of each component and its origin must be taken into con-sideration. Most consumer items are currently made with virgin plas-tics, which are usually derived from petroleum. For example, metal gears have been replaced by plastic gears, which o.er a better price/ performance ratio. Despite numerous bene.ts, the intensive use of plastics raises sustainability issues because of the depletion of non-re-newable petroleum resources and the pollution that is generated. 
Reinforcement with short natural .bers is proposed as a way of enhancing the mechanical properties of low-cost plastics and limiting their environmental impact. E.orts to produce this type of composite material date back to the 1980s. It was soon realized that coupling agents were needed in order to obtain performances comparable to those of technical plastics [1,2]. For a proposed composite to serve its purpose, it must be recyclable. Furthermore, the properties must be conserved after multiple injection cycles [3]. 
Optimizing the formulation of composite .llers has been the subject of more recent research [4每12]. Yellow birch is interesting because of its abundance, especially in regions such as Mauricie in the Canadian province of Qu谷bec, where paper production has been a major industry for years [13,14]. It is rarely used in this industry, and its cost would not be a.ected by demand for paper products. Its use in composites would be facilitated by .ber processing technology developed in the 



pulp and paper industry. High-density polyethylene (HDPE) is the preferred matrix for composites because of its low cost compared to other thermoplastics [6] and the possibility of producing it from bio-mass [7,8,12]. The basic mechanical properties and behavior of HDPE/ birch .ber composite have been studied [5每10]. Tension tests have shown the bene.ts of using a coupling agent [6]. In addition to bending tests and acoustic emission, creep and fatigue tests have been used to quantify durability and identify the mechanisms by which the material is damaged [5,7,8]. The four principal modes of damage identi.ed in tensile and bending tests are: matrix micro cracking, matrix/matrix friction, .ber/matrix de-bonding and matrix/.ber friction. Residual load, acoustic energy and crack propagation have been recorded [10]. Correlations are observed between these three damage indices and material lifetime. In terms of lifetime, HDPE/birch .ber composite compares advantageously with polyamide 6 [10]. 
One application suggested for composites is plastic gearing, based on the current uses of technical plastics and the growth of these markets over the years [15]. Gear thermal behavior [16], root stress [17] and critical damage mode [18] have been evaluated. Carbon particles have been found to enhance the friction performance of POM gears [19] by changing the critical fatigue mode at lower material cost. However, carbon is not comparable to short natural .bers. Little information has been published on short-.ber composite gears. The use of natural .ber composites in structural applications is being delayed pending further safety and reliability studies. 
Like carbon-reinforced POM, .ber-reinforced composite costs less 


Received 22 May 2020; Received in revised form 16 July 2020; Accepted 24 July 2020 
Available online 28 July 2020

Fig. 1. Sequence of tests in the evaluation of a new material for gearing applications. 
than the unreinforced plastic while o.ering basic mechanical properties better than those of the plastic, based on thermal behavior and lifetime in gear rotation tests [12]. Mixed damage modes are observed, such as root cracking, thermal surface wear and general thermal degradation. The thermal behavior of the HDPE/birch composite has been evaluated [12], but bending behavior has been examined only using test samples [10]. The next step is to observe how wear evolves in a gear made of the material [20]. In the case of gears, the next most signi.cant cause of failure after thermal e.ects is tooth root fatigue [18]. No studies have been conducted on the single-gear-tooth fatigue behavior of natural .ber composites. To focus on root fatigue, tooth bending is proposed as an intermediate test between three-point-bending [10] and rotating gear tests [12]. 
Fig. 1 shows the progression of the speci.city of gear material fa-tigue tests. Compared to three-point-bending, tooth bending focuses the stress on the tooth base and adds a shear stress component. It di.ers from rotating tests by involving no slippage and almost no thermal e.ect. Plastic gears are used usually in low-torque and long-run appli-cations, where wear and root fatigue are more likely to occur, if the gear train is properly designed. 
Gear tooth deterioration due to bending is di.cult to assess in a high rotation test because of the speed of movement. In addition, some of the deterioration will be due to heat associated with friction. The thermal component is negligible when a single non-moving tooth is tested. Numerous studies show that material fatigue occurs in single teeth in bending tests [21每25] 
using a bench based on SAE standard J1619 [26]. In every case, tooth life ends with root cracking, which is the focus of this study. 
To observe the bending behavior of composite reinforced with birch short .ber in gearing applications, a test bench was designed for op-eration in static and fatigue modes. Material deterioration (i.e. gear tooth root cracking) was monitored throughout the fatigue tests. Two non-destructive evaluation techniques (acoustic emission and digital image correlation) have proven their e.ectiveness in the monitoring of gear tooth root fatigue damage. A Weibull distribution was then used to model the material lifetime probabilities. 
In the sections that follow, we describe the process used to make the gears, the test bench, the static test procedure and the fatigue tests. Static test results for the composite and the unreinforced HDPE are compared. Fatigue data, including damage progression and gear life-time, are compared with published values. Finally, the Weibull dis-tributions are shown for each displacement and compared with the literature. 
METHOD
2. Experimentation 
2.1. Materials and sample production 
Yellow birch thermomechanical wood pulp .ber (Fig. 2) was pre-pared at the Innovations Institute in Ecomaterials, Ecoproducts and Ecoenergies, biomass based (I2E3) at Universit谷 du Qu谷bec 角 Trois-Rivi豕res (UQTR). Wood .ber was dried at 80 ∼C in an air-circulating oven for 24 h and then ground to 20每60 mesh size before use. The .ber aspect ratio (mean length divided by average diameter) classes were obtained by mechanical re.ning and screening and characterized using an OpTest .ber quality analyzer (Table 1). 
The bio-composite consists of a matrix (HDPE), reinforcing material (yellow birch short .ber, average length 0.49 mm, average thickness 24.7 米m) and a coupling agent (maleic-anhydride-grafted polyethylene, aka MAPE) (Fig. 2). Their proportion in mass are 57% of HDPE, 40% of .bers and 3% of MAPE. The material base mechanical properties are shown in Table 
1. Those are experimental mechanical properties obtain during previous studies [6每8,27] at the exception of the MAPE prop-erties and those marked with an asterix. MAPE properties are approx-imate to generic low density polyethylene (LDPE) in which the maleic hydride is dissolved, and the ones marked with an asterix are evaluated using general rule of mixtures. The adapted rule of mixture of La-vengoof-Goettler [27] gives a Young＊s modulus value of 3.31 GPa. This value is lower than the experimental value obtained. Birch .ber Poisson ratio and tensile strength are calculated with the standard rule of mixture since their length doesn＊t allow standard characterization. The HDPE and MAPE were mixed on heated rollers at 190 ∼C (the production process is shown schematically in Fig. 3) and the .bers were added slowly to keep the mixture in a molten state. Once out of the rollers, the composite was ground to granules 1每3 mm in diameter. 
The gear mold was .lled with granules and heated to 190 ∼C. The melted composite was mixed thoroughly before applying 5.5 MPa of pressure for ten minutes. The press was then water cooled. A central hole was drilled in the de-molded gear (Fig.4a). The thickness was 6.35 mm, the diameter was 76.2 mm and the 30 teeth had a diametral pitch of 10 per inch. A tooth was removed to facilitate mounting on the test bench. 
2.2. Mechanical tests 
2.2.1. Quasi-static bending tests 
The main purpose of the static tests was to evaluate the elastic properties, .exural strength and fracture mode of the composite. Three loading speeds were chosen to represent the progression between quasi-static speed and a fatigue test loading speed. A 10 Hz [10] test at 0.5 mm displacement has a speed of 942 mm/min, which is over the maximum of 500 mm/min of our static test machine. The speeds were therefore 500 mm/min, 50 mm/min and 5 mm/min to assess the strain hardening e.ect. These speeds are in accordance with ISO 178:2019 standard practice for plastics determination of .exural properties. An Instron LM-U150 equipped with a 150 kN load cell was used. 
Adjustable to multiple gear sizes and contact points, the single-tooth test bench (Fig. 5) is designed to ensure that the test tooth fails before the locking tooth. The test bench applies the load in a linear motion instead of a circular motion as proposed by the SAE J1619 standard. The main reason is the allowance of future testing on di.erent gear sizes that is easier and cheaper to design with a linear motion. A tri-angular abutment in contact with the former and a square abutment next to the latter oppose the clockwise rotation of the gear. The locking tooth abutment is mounted on a mechanical jack to allow adjustment. A one-tooth separation ensures that the pressure points do not interact. The test tooth abutment is supported horizontally by a bearing to prevent lateral load due to the angle of action relative to the load cell. Therefore, 9 teeth out of 30 can be tested as shown on Fig. 4 
b). The tooth number 3 is tested .rst with tooth number 1 as the locking tooth, 

Fig. 2. Base materials of the proposed composite.  
Table 1 Base material mechanical properties.  Birch 
Elastic modulus (GPa) 13.9 1.27 0.12每0.55 4.48 Elongation at break (%) 每 590 450每810 2.44 Poisson Ratio 0.17* 0.46 每 0.33 Tensile Strength (MPa) 149.67* 22.0 16 38.05 Mean length, L (mm) 0.49 每每 每 Mean width, D (米m) 24.7 每每 每 Aspect ratio (L/D) 19.8 每每 每 
then tooth number 6 with tooth number 4 as the locking tooth and so on. 


2.2.2. Bending fatigue tests 
The same bench was used with an MTS hydraulic machine equipped with a 100 kN load cell. Fatigue tests were performed using displace-ment control. They were performed using sinusoidal displacement control at a 10 Hz loading frequency. The displacement ratio (R = 汛min/汛max) was 0 for these tests. This ratio is chosen because a real gear tooth has its load removed between each gear revolution. The choice of frequency was based on experimental fatigue tests conducted on composite gears at rotational speeds ranging from 500 rpm to 1500 rpm [12] 
and corresponding respectively to 8 Hz and 25 Hz. The minimum value is chosen to obtain an endurance limit and the other values are chosen with the minimal increment. An increment of 
0.03 mm was necessary to ensure that the displacements were distinct, since the low reaction force from the gear lowered the precision of the position reset. The resulting .ve cases are: 0.46 mm, 0.49 mm, 
0.52 mm, 0.55 mm and 0.58 mm. 
The objectives of these tests were to investigate the mechanical behavior of and damage to bio-composite under fatigue loading and to estimate the endurance limit of single gear tooth. A target of 15 samples by load case is .xed to allow further statistical analysis of the cumu-lative damage and its evolution during the fatigue tests. A high-speed charge-coupled device (CCD) camera with a 2D digital image correla-tion system (StrainMaster, LaVision Inc.) and acoustic emission sensors were used to assess crack initiation and evolution. Two acoustic sensors were attached to the gear, as shown in Fig. 
6. An acoustic threshold level set at 30 dB was used to .lter background noise. The quality of the acoustic data mainly depends on the choice of the waveform system timing parameters, namely the peak de.nition time, hit de.nition time and hit lockout time, which were set respectively at 40 米s, 80 米s and 200 米s [5]. Cumulative damage was recorded. The CCD camera was used to record macro-cracks on the gear tooth surface (Fig. 6). The Fig. 3. Schematic summary of the composite production process. 
P. Blais and L. Toubal International Journal of Fatigue 141 (2020) 105857 

Fig. 4. A test gear made of HDPE/birch .ber composite; (a) test gear side view, (b) schematic gear test dimensions and test order. 
camera sensor dimensions were 7.2 mm ℅ 5.4 mm, the resolution was 1628 ℅ 1236 pixels and maximal update rate was 14 frames per second. Images were captured until complete failure of the gear tooth. A precision of 0.02 mm was possible with the camera, but a precision of 
0.2 mm was obtained by the program transferring the data from the images to numerical values. Tooth lifetime was based on crack initia-tion, because of the speed of propagation to 50% of the tooth width. Since crack length was measured only on one side of the gear, it could have been longer below the surface or on the other side, making crack initiation a more objective threshold. 
The three damage indices measured in the fatigue test were crack length, residual load and acoustic emission. Their purpose is to show the progression of damage before and after the crack initiation. Thermal readings were obtained in preliminary tests at each displacement, but were not distinguishable from the thermal camera variance, which is about 3 ∼C. As in previous studies [10], self-heating was neglected. 
The end of the second phase of the residual load was evaluated as a criterion for determining life limit for comparison purposes. The max-imum base tooth stress (考) was estimated using the AGMA equation [28] shown below (1). This equation is accessible since data on each factor are abundant and a single gear tooth is loaded over a small range of its normal use. 
考 is the calculated stress at the base of the tooth, Wt is the tangent load, KO is the overload factor, KV is the dynamic factor, KS the dimensional factor, Pd is the diametral pitch (10 teeth/inch), F is the tooth width 
(0.25 in.), Km is the load distribution factor, KB is the rim thickness factor and J is the form factor. The overload factor is set to compensate for any impact that could occur form the controlled machine or power source. For our experiment, where the gear is .xed and the ※controlled machine§ is a hydraulic fatigue machine. KO is then set to 1. The dy-namic factor is a function of loading speed and material .nish. It gets closer to 1 a smoother .nish and a slower loading speed. It is therefore .xed as 1 [29]. The dimensional factor takes into consideration the tooth width, Lewis geometrical factor and diametral pitch. The calcu-lated value of the dimensional is 0.944, it is then set to 1 according to Budynas and al. [29]. The gear geometry has a diametral pitch of 10 teeth/inch and a width of 0.25 in. The load distribution factor takes into consideration the load non-uniformities over the span of the line of action. Since our test bench loads the tooth at only one point of the line of action, the load distribution factor is set to 1. The gear is not a rim gear, so the rim thickness factor is neglected, and the form factor is equal to 0.26. 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Single-tooth quasi-static loading 
Complete static results are shown in Table 
2. A strain hardening e.ect can be inferred from the increase of the force as the loading speed increases whereas the displacement at failure decreases. These e.ects appear on the typical curve for each loading speed and material shown in Fig. 7. Two materials are being tested for comparison purposes. The composite is the main subject of the study and pure HDPE represents the composite matrix, which is the base material we are trying to en-hance. 
Both materials, either the composite or the pure HDPE show dif-ferent behavior for the same static test and geometry. Pure HDPE shows non-linear behavior before failure, whereas the composite shows fragile behavior. A reason for this e.ect is the pure HDPE plastic deformation. Pure HDPE undergoes considerable plastic deformation, which reduces the concentration of stress at the tooth base by increasing the base 

Fig. 5. The test bench with a sample mounted for fatigue testing (side view). 
Fig. 6. Acoustic emission sensors (left) and side view of the CCD camera setup. 
Table 2 	Table 3 
Single gear tooth results: Static .exural max load and displacement at failure. Quasi-static stress for unreinforced and reinforced HDPE [11]. 



The same e.ect is seen on the stress maxima (Table 3). Unreinforced shows a higher stress at failure than the composite and the three-point-bending equivalent. In addition to elastic deformation reducing the stress concentration, since the stress at the tooth base reaches yield levels, the stress concentration decreases even more as plastic de-Average formation increases. In the case of unreinforced HDPE, the evaluated stress is above the real stress. The evaluated stress doesn＊t consider the plastic deformation and the resulting decrease of the concentration Unreinforced HDPE 
 factor. Reinforced samples show a higher stress maximum than three-point bending, partly due to the indistinguishable local plastic zone that reduces the stress concentration. However, this is not factored into stress calculation. 
 In terms of sti.nesses (Fig. 8), adding .ber to the HDPE matrix  seemed to have little to no impact on the strain hardening e.ect. As mentioned above, birch .ber increased the overall sti.ness of the 
Average thermoplastic. The sti.ness was measured using the linear elastic sec-tion of the load curves obtained for each type of sample. 

3.2. Gear tooth lifetime and damage progression 
The experimental results are summarised in the displacement cycles (汛-N) charts in Fig. 
9, which shows the progression of the number of cycles at crack initiation for each displacement and HDPE content. This 
radius. This leads to a displacement at failure a lot higher than the composite. On the other hand, the composite shows a load nearly twice that of the pure HDPE for the same displacement and loading speed. No concentration relief takes place before the composite resistance is reached, because near to no plastic deformation takes place at the tooth 
Fig. 9. Distribution of gear tooth fatigue at crack initiation. 
standard semi-log fatigue diagram is built by plotting the amplitude of the imposed displacement level 汛 against the number of cycles to crack initiation Nf. The dots represent individual samples and the dotted lines represent Weibull 10%, 50% and 90% failure distribution marks. The displacements are presented as a percentage of the corresponding static failure displacement. An arrowhead at 106 cycles indicates that these specimens did not fail at that displacement level. The high displacement at failure of unreinforced HDPE sets its relative displacement well below that of the reinforced material. The high cycle fatigue strength of reinforced HDPE is about 39% of its ultimate displacement (U汛) and about 18% for unreinforced. The inherent variability of fatigue lifetime may explain in part the rather large degree of scatter apparent in the data. 
For further comparison with previous studies, gear tooth life esti-mated on the basis of the end of the residual load stable phase was considered as the equivalent stress that the tooth would have endured if it had been tested under constant force rather than constant displace-ment. Typical three damage index graphs for both reinforced and un-reinforced material are shown on Fig. 
10. The red circles indicate the end of the residual load second phase end for both materials. Fig. 11 and Table 4 
show that the lifetimes were shorter than estimated pre-viously. This is due to the stress and load measurement methods. 
Table 4 
Second lifetime evaluation and comparison of reinforced samples. 
Stress  Lifetime  Author  

Assuming the use of a full gear matched with a rack or another gear of which the tooth is loaded over its entire length, the AGMA equation underestimates the real stress on the tooth. The test bench used in the present study loads the test tooth only at its tip to ensure that it breaks before the locking tooth, which represents the worst loading case [30]. In addition, the steady phase recorded previously [10] is much .atter than those recorded in the present tests, which would further under-estimate the stress calculated at the end of the phase. 
Since all three 0.46 mm tests reached 106 cycles and showed little to no damage, analysis was limited to the four larger displacement cases, plotted in Fig. 12. The damage index is plotted as the average number of cycles needed to reach a damage level. Error bars show the standard deviation of the damage index at di.erent points of the indices. Pre-vious work by Bravo and al. [12] 
on functional gear train shows that the main cause of failure is root fatigue. The present study emphasizes on root fatigue and the load being applied at the tooth tip makes the lifetimes shorter than the ones recorded by Bravo and al. [12]. The principal reason why this study takes place is to characterize the da-mage progression to root failure and Fig. 11 shows that the root failures obtained during this study show a trend close to the one of a func-tioning gear train. 
The cracking index represents the crack length relative to its max-imum possible length: 


where ICracking is the damage index, tc is the crack length and td is the tooth thickness at the crack location. 
The residual load index is given by: 
RLi (3) where IRL is the residual load damage index, RLN is the current residual load value and RLi is the residual load of the .rst cycle. 

The acoustic emission index is the cumulative number of counts relative to the total number of counts: 

where IAE is the acoustic emission damage index, CN is the current emission number of counts and Cf is the .nal number of counts. 
All three indices obtained are between 0 and 1. A damage index is a dimensionless number which varies from zero to one, and the failure should occur when the index reaches one. The use of indices between 0 and 1 is arbitrary and means an adjustment of the values measured on di.erent scales to a common scale. That will help the comparison be-tween the three indices and with other samples. For a literature com-parison, values up to 50% in sti.ness reduction are used as a failure criterion in long .bre composite materials [31]. 
Some interactions between the indices can be observed. The longer the crack, the lower the sti.ness and the smaller the reaction load. When a crack reached 80% of its possible length, the reaction load was very low, and progression sometimes stopped. If an advancing crack met a bunch of suitably oriented .bers when the residual load was low, it probably stopped [32每34]. If it met few or no such .bers, it grew to more than 90% of the possible length. This is why cracking standard deviation gets larger around 80% of progression. The 0.58 mm case 
P. Blais and L. Toubal does not show this trend because a larger displacement yielded to a larger load and imposed the continuity of the cracking process with a lower probability of stoppage. 
In reinforced HDPE, acoustic emission occurred principally during crack progression. Unlike in unreinforced HDPE, it took place before and during plastic deformation, as shown in Fig. 
10. Fig. 13 shows crack paths in both materials. In reinforced HDPE (b), cracks changed di-rection more, which requires more energy than propagating in a straight line. Much acoustic activity also occurred after the end of crack progression. This is due to friction between crack surfaces. Since ma-trix/matrix friction is known as one of the four damage modes visua-lizable by acoustic emission [5,7], the texture of the crack suggests an abundance of friction. 
Residual load changed in 3 phases: rapid initial decay, a constant phase and a .nal decrease. The initial drop in residual load is due to the cyclic accommodation of HDPE [35] and is followed by degradation at a lower rate. The end of the second phase coincided with crack initia-tion. The third phase started with crack initiation and .nished along with crack progression. 
These phases appear to progress di.erently in three-point bending tests [10]. Crack initiation may span about 30% of the total life of the sample, and the initial and rapid phase may be much shorter. Another stage characterized by the crack progressing faster to failure may occur near the end of the test. No such stage was observed in the present study. 
The main goal is not to enhance the material durability, but to get a better understanding of the damage process. The composite gives an indication of the approaching failure of the tooth. The crack propaga-tion to 40% is fast, but the overall progression is slower than the un-reinforced HDPE. Moreover, the start of acoustic emission correlates with crack initiation. giving another indication of the failure＊s ap-proach. 
3.3. Weibull distribution plotting 
The Weibull distribution is commonly used to describe the prob-ability of material failure. The cumulative Weibull distribution is de-.ned as: 


Where N is the number of load cycles, PR is the probability that the sample is fractured at N cycles, 汐 is the Weibull shape coe.cient and N0 is the characteristic lifetime in load cycles. 
The linearized Weibull distributions illustrated in Fig. 14 show a linear .t with its correlation coe.cient. The dots represent the ex-perimental results. The Weibull shape coe.cient and lifetime are shown in Table 5. A shape coe.cient below 2 for all four cases indicates a broad distribution of lifetime. The values are similar, the lowest corre-sponding to 0.49 mm displacement, at which fatigue was slowest and (logically) the most variable. The characteristic lifetime increased with decreasing displacement, as expected. Distribution width is associated with the material being short .ber composite, due to the major impact of random .ber orientation and local concentration on the mechanical properties and hence the fatigue-determined lifetime [32,36]. 


Table 5 Weibull distribution parameters.  0.49 mm  0.52 mm  0.55 mm  0.58 mm  
N0 (charac. lifetime) 汐 (shape)  132 145 ㊣ 35 233 1.23 ㊣ 0.17  66 664 ㊣ 7 766 1.73 ㊣ 0.10  40 005 ㊣ 10 031 1.57 ㊣ 0.20  23 707 ㊣ 3 222 1.54 ㊣ 0.11  

Fig. shows the experimental (dots) and Weibull (smooth line) cumulative distributions. The four displacement cases are shown and identi.ed with their absolute displacement value in mm and their re-lative to ultimate displacement value in percentage. A two-shoulders distribution can be interpreted from one or two of the distributions. However, the standard Weibull distribution seems satisfactory for the current study since the coe.cient of determination R2 is at least 0.85. For distributions with 12 samples, namely 0.49 mm and 0.55 mm, R2 is respectively 0.85 and 0.86. For those with 15 samples, namely 0.52 mm and 0.58 mm, R2 is respectively 0.96 and 0.95. The fatigue behavior is thus considered with at least 85% con.dence to be of Weibull type. 
CONCLUSION
4. Conclusion 
The HDPE/birch .ber composite material tested in this study could be used to manufacture ecofriendly machine parts at lower cost. The .bres cost is around 1.07 USD$/kg [6], HDPE is at 1.20 USD$/kg, PA66 is around 1.85 USD$/kg, ABS is around 2.50 USD$/kg and PEEK is around 41.00 USD$/kg. The addition of .bers to HDPE reduces the cost of the material which is already lower than the cost of other high re-sistance plastics. Blends containing up to 40% short natural .bers by weight have static mechanical properties comparable to those of poly-amide 66. The material has been tested in bulk form and in rotating gear tests. In this study, it was subjected to the single-gear-tooth bending test, which allows evaluation of bending behavior without friction and thermal degradation. 
The customized test bench allowed static testing at di.erent speeds and comparison of the composite and the pure thermoplastic in terms of fracture behavior and other properties. Fatigue tests run on the same bench with four displacement factors showed the evolution of three damage indices: crack length, residual load and acoustic emission. A large number of specimens were tested, and three damage indices were evaluated to study the fatigue behaviour of single-gear-tooth bending of HDPE reinforced with short natural .ber. Crack progression, residual load and acoustic emission show consistent results that track the pro-gressive damage to the material. Crack initiation appears more suitable for evaluating gear tooth lifetime since subsequent crack progression may be very fast. Cracking slows down when the displacement is .xed, and the reaction load thus decreases as the crack process advances. 
Although the trends were comparable with published results, var-iations in material lifetime were noted. Lifetime was modelled using a linearized form of the Weibull distribution. The model shows a good .t and provides insight into the lifetime distribution of the material under fatigue. Material variability was likely the source of the wide range of responses, since the .ber distribution and orientation are random. 
Future studies will focus on designing an industrial molding process that reduces material variability and brings HDPE/birch .ber compo-site material closer to market readiness. All improvements thus ob-tained will be tested by comparing the composite to pure technical plastic using the gear tooth test described in this study. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing .nancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in.u-ence the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to acknowledge the .nancial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada. 








