Surface roughness effects on the fatigue strength of additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V 
Jonathan Peguesa,b, Michael Roachc, R. Scott Williamsonc, Nima Shamsaeia,b,. 

a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, United States b National Center for Additive Manufacturing Excellence (NCAME), Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, United States c Department of Biomedical Materials Science, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, United States 
ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT 
Keywords: 
Additive manufacturing Fatigue behavior Surface roughness Size effects Geometry 
ABSTRACT
Additive manufacturing has become an increasingly popular advanced manufacturing technique, however, many questions concerning the reliability of parts fabricated by methods such as laser powder bed fusion must be addressed. In this research, the e.ect of surface roughness and size is investigated by designing various addi-tively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V specimen geometries. These as-built specimens were designed to speci.cally determine the e.ect of surface area and part diameter on the fatigue behavior of specimens fabricated diagonally from the substrate. Results indicate that the fatigue behavior is more sensitive to part diameter than surface area. Parts with diameters of 4.90 mm or less showed higher surface roughness on the down-skin surface. This var-iation diminished, however, for specimens with diameters larger than 4.90 mm. Additionally, as part diameter decreased, the di.erence between the load-bearing and nominal stress amplitudes, caused by surface roughness, increased, resulting in signi.cant scatter in the high cycle fatigue data. 
INTRODUCTION
1. Introduction 
Additive manufacturing has become an increasingly popular man-ufacturing technique offering large design freedoms and a significant potential for fabricating optimized and customized parts with complex geometries. In the aerospace industry, topology optimization can be utilized to create complex geometries that can reduce weight of struc-tural parts, and thus, e.ectively increasing fuel e.ciency. These com-plex geometries often cannot be fabricated through traditional sub-tractive methods, however, additive manufacturing has shown the ability to produce such geometries [1]. In the biomedical industry, additive manufacturing promises customized parts, per patient/injury, that can be readily tailored to the patient ensuring a better .t. While titanium alloys such as Ti-6Al-4V are commonly used in both aerospace parts and biomedical implants due to their high strength-to-weight ratio, excellent mechanical properties, and biocompatibility [2每5], they are also compatible with additive manufacturing processes because of their weld-ability. One of the major obstacles facing full implementa-tion of additive manufactured (AM) Ti-6Al-4V parts, however, is the concern with the reliability, especially under cyclic loading conditions. While extensive research has been conducted on the fatigue behavior of traditional wrought Ti-6Al-4V [5每12], there are needs for further in-vestigating the fatigue behavior of AM counterparts due to their structural imperfections such as defects/pores and increased surface roughness [13每16]. 
The reliability and durability concerns for AM parts have driven a recent surge of research into the fatigue behavior of AM parts [13每15,17,18]. Defects associated with AM parts such as porosity and lack of fusion can reduce the fatigue life leading to lower endurance limits compared to traditional wrought alloys. Additionally, as-built AM parts have been shown to have even lower fatigue limits when com-pared to parts that underwent post-process machining and polishing [14,15]. This is attributed to the high surface roughness of the as-built parts in which the micro-notches associated with partially melted powders on the surface act as stress concentrators resulting in earlier crack initiation [19]. Parts fabricated diagonally have been shown to have increased surface roughness on the down-skin surface, which can further reduce the fatigue strength of AM parts [20,21]. 
There have been many investigations that attempt to characterize the e.ect of surface roughness on the fatigue behavior of both wrought and AM materials with both conditions showing mixed results [22每27]. Removal of the surface roughness through machining and polishing is necessary for AM parts to achieve fatigue limits that are more com-parable to wrought materials. However, one of the most bene.cial promises of additive manufacturing technology is the ability to manu-facture net shape parts without the need of further subtractive 

machining or polishing. For this reason, it is imperative to better un-derstand the fatigue performance of AM parts fabricated in the net shape condition without any surface enhancements before testing. Additionally, the range of AM part sizes can vary from small medical implants to large structural components in which the fatigue behavior of the net shape parts may di.er between these contrasting sizes. 
The objective of this research is to investigate the e.ect of part size in relation to surface roughness, surface area, and gage diameter on the fatigue behavior of laser-based powder bed fusion (L-PBF) specimens in as-built condition. Directly correlating these specimen properties to the corresponding fatigue performance for various part sizes is critical to reliably design AM parts with the ability to withstand the service loadings associated with a given application. 
METHOD
2. Materials and methods 
A series of .ve specimen geometries were designed to investigate the e.ect of part size on the fatigue behavior of L-PBF Ti-6Al-4V. The five specimen geometries are shown in Fig. 1 and can be separated into two distinct groups. The .rst of these groups maintains constant gage volume while incrementally increasing the gage surface area by 25%. These geometries are referred to as the constant gage volume (CGV) specimens and shown as Geometries 1每3in Fig. 1. In order to maintain the constant volume between Geometries 1每3 while increasing the surface area, the gage diameter and gage lengths were adjusted accordingly. The second specimen group maintains constant gage dia-meter while incrementally increasing the gage surface area by 25% as shown for Geometries 4 and 5 in Fig. 1. These specimens are referred to as the constant gage diameter (CGD) and are designed to account for any e.ect that the change in the gage diameter may have on the fatigue behavior. The sub-sized geometries were chosen to allow each group to be fabricated during the same build to limit variability between tests. 
Parts were fabricated on an EOS M290 (EOS, Krailling, Germany) AM machine with a maximum laser power of 400 W. The process parameters used for fabrication were the suggested performance para-meters provided by EOS for Ti-6Al-4V components. This set of process parameters include a laser power of 280 W, a scan speed of 1200 mm/s, and a hatch distance of 0.140 mm. The powder was supplied by LPW Technology Inc. (LPW, Runcorn, UK) and had a particle size range of 15每45 米m. All specimens were fabricated at an angle of 45∼ from the substrate. Before removal from the substrate, the parts were stress re-lieved at 700 ∼C for one hour, and air cooled to room temperature. The time and temperature were selected to maintain the as-built micro-structure while minimizing the e.ects of residual stress that arise from the high cooling rates associated with L-PBF. 
The surface roughness of the up-skin and down-skin surfaces of each specimen was measured at two areas within the gage section using a Keyence VHX-1000 (Keyence, Osaka, Japan) digital microscope. The down-skin and up-skin surfaces are shown in Fig. 2 (not to scale) and are termed in relation to the build direction. Down-skin refers to sur-faces in which the vertical component of the vector normal to the surface is in the opposite direction of the build progression. This occurs in overhangs or, as in this case, surfaces that are diagonal and directed opposite of the build direction. Up-skin refers to surfaces where the vertical component of the vector normal to the surface is in the same direction as the build progression. Representative measurements for a down-skin surface are schematically shown in Fig. 3 where the 3D surface map was collected from each end of the uniform gage section. Triplicate line measurements were taken from each surface map, re-sulting in six total measurements for each up-skin and down skin surface. The arithmetic mean roughness value (Ra) was calculated for each line measurement and an average for each up-skin or down-skin surface was obtained. Statistical ANOVA (analysis of variance) (汐 = 0.05) was performed on the surface roughness measurements taken from each geometry to determine if the roughness between the given geometries were statistically di.erent. 
Microstructure analysis was performed on representative samples within the gage section. The general microstructure was revealed using Kroll＊s reagent and optical microscopy. Additionally, bulk x-ray dif-fraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy, and electron backscatter di.raction (EBSD) analyses were performed to determine the phase fraction and equilibrium grain shape and size. Bulk XRD was performed on a Scintag XDS2000 (Scintag, Franklin, MA) di.ractometer and the EBSD analysis was performed on a Zeiss Supra 40 FEG (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) scanning electron microscope (SEM) with EDAX OIM (EDAX, Draper, UT) analysis software. 
Fatigue testing was conducted on an MTS servo-hydraulic testing frame (MTS, Eden Prairie, MN) with a 100 kN capacity. For each spe-cimen type, a set of four fully reversed (R = .1) stress amplitudes were selected to provide low-cycle fatigue (LCF), intermediate-cycle fatigue, and high-cycle fatigue (HCF) lives. Before testing, the cross-sectional area was initially measured with calipers to select an appropriate loading force for the desired nominal stress amplitude, 考a. These initial measurements did not provide an adequate description of the load-bearing cross-sectional area due to the high surface roughness. Upon failure, fracture surfaces were removed and prepared for analytical fractography, which was conducted on a Zeiss Supra 40 FEG SEM. In addition to fractography, the fracture surfaces were measured using digital imaging and ImageJ software to give a more accurate mea-surement of the load-bearing cross-sectional area. Fig. 4 
gives a re-presentation of the initial caliper measured cross-section in red1 and the more representative load-bearing cross-sectional area in blue1, which was then used to calculate a more representative applied stress ampli-tude for the stress-life curves. 
RESULT
3. Experimental results 

3.1. Microstructure 
The general microstructure of the AM Ti-6Al-4V parts consisted of semi-columnar prior 汕 grains with the major axis parallel to the build direction. The columnar microstructure had abrupt changes in the prior 汕 grain orientation resulting in the broken columnar microstructure observed. A scaled representation of the microstructure is given in the zoomed in area of Fig. 
5. As can be seen, the major axis of the prior 汕 grains are oriented at an angle of 45∼ from the loading direction, in a broken epitaxial manner along the build direction. The prior 汕 grains have abrupt interruptions in the epitaxial growth which results in new grains with di.erent orientations, referred to as stray grains by the welding community [28每30]. Anderson and Dupont [29] 
concluded that, during the welding process of a Ni-based super alloy, stray grain formation increases with increasing travel speed and power, which is related to the high thermal gradient. The L-PBF process inherently re-sults in large thermal gradients due to the extremely high cooling rates contributing to the stray columnar prior 汕 grain structure. 
In addition to optical microscopy, EBSD and XRD were conducted to better analyze the microstructure. The results show a fully martensitic microstructure as indicated by the phase map, acicular grain structure, and absence of the equilibrium 汕 phase, as detailed in Fig. 6(b). In general, most wrought Ti-6Al-4V alloys have an equilibrium 汐 + 汕 phase in which the 汐 phase grows from the 汕 phase upon relatively slow cooling during thermal treatment. The absence of the equilibrium 汕 phase indicates that there was not enough time during cooling in L-PBF process to allow the 汐 phase to di.use from the 汕 phase, and thus, the di.usionless 汕 ↙ 汐∩ martensitic phase transformation occurred [31,32]. The 汐∩ grain size was measured using the EBSD data and OIM software giving an average width of 1.5 米m with an average aspect ratio of 0.55. The inverse pole .gure map, in Fig. 6(a), con.rms that most grains are acicular, which is commonly related to the martensitic phase in tita-nium alloys. 


3.2. Fatigue behavior 
The stress-life fatigue behavior of wrought Ti-6Al-4V has been well studied and shown to have a fatigue limit in the range of 550每750 MPa [33]. The stress-life curves for both CGV and CGD specimens with the appropriate stress amplitudes based on the load-bearing cross-sectional area are given in Fig. 7(a) and (b), respectively. The data is plotted on a semi-log scale to give a more consistent representation of the variation between data points that would diminish on a log每log plot due to the low stress amplitude range (75每450 MPa) tested. The fatigue limit for these specimens falls between 75 and 120 MPa which is in stark con-trast to the ranges observed for wrought Ti-6Al-4V alloys (550每750 MPa). The reduced fatigue limit is likely due to the high surface roughness, which results in many prime crack nucleation sites at the e.ective notch-like areas along the rough surface highlighted in red1 in Fig. 4. Additionally, the martensitic microstructure has also been shown to have a detrimental e.ect on the fatigue behavior of ti-tanium alloys [34]. A combination of these two e.ects can result in the drastic reduction of the fatigue limit for L-PBF produced Ti-6Al-4V parts in the as-built condition. 
The stress-life fatigue behavior of CGV specimens is presented in Fig. 7(a), in which the hollow symbols indicate tests that reached failure, while the solid symbols indicate tests that did not fail before 107 cycles. The stress-life data shows a slight increase in fatigue life for Geometry 1 which had the smallest surface area; however, Geometries 2 and 3 exhibited similar fatigue lives for nominal stress amplitudes larger than 100 MPa. Furthermore, the nominal stress amplitude of 100 MPa resulted in fatigue lives longer than 107 cycles for specimens in Geometries 1 and 2, while Geometry 3 required a reduction to 75 MPa to achieve a fatigue life longer than 107 cycles. These results indicate that the di.erence in fatigue behavior across all geometries may be related to other factors besides surface area, as was described by Pegues et al. [35]. 
The .nal two specimen sets, CGD Geometries 4 and 5, were de-signed to evaluate any size e.ects as a result of the decreasing cross-sectional diameter in CGV specimens. The diameters of these CGD specimens (Geometries 4 and 5) were held constant while the gage length was increased from 9.75 mm in Geometry 4 to 12.00 mm in Geometry 5 producing an increased surface area of 25%. Therefore, the CGD geometries have di.erent surface areas and similar diameters to determine if the di.erences in fatigue behavior between Geometry 1每3 were related to surface area or cross-sectional diameter. The CGD stress-life fatigue data set was generated in a similar fashion to the CGV specimens and is plotted in Fig. 
7(b). The stress-life behavior of Geo-metries 4 and 5 were similar to Geometry 3 in which a stress amplitude of 75 MPa was required to obtain a runout past 107 cycles. There was an unexpected large amount of scatter for Geometry 4 compared to the other geometries for stress amplitudes around 100 MPa. Interestingly, the Geometry 4 specimen exhibiting the longest fatigue life had slightly lower 考a, as determined by the load-bearing cross-section, compared to the other two specimens at this nominal stress amplitude. 
Fig. 8 presents the comparison of all fatigue data along with the stress-life fatigue curves, determined by Basquin＊s equation [36]. The fatigue behavior is similar between geometries 2每5 except for the high cycle fatigue tests (考a ≒ 100 MPa) in which there is a signi.cant amount of scatter among the specimens. Geometries 1 and 2 both had fatigue limits at a nominal stress amplitude of 100 MPa while all other geometries resulted in failure at this stress level. As the stress amplitude approaches 200 MPa, however, the data sets between Geometries 2每5in Fig. 8(a) show consistent overlap. Comparing the stress-life curves in Fig. 8(b), there is an observable shift in fatigue life for Geometry 1 while Geometries 2每5 all show overlap amongst each other. The in-consistent amount of scatter in the HCF regime cannot be adequately explained without further investigation into the fracture surfaces. 


3.3. Fractography 
Fractography was performed on select specimens to investigate potential diffferences in failure mechanisms between sample geometries. Specifically, the failure mechanisms of Geometries 2每5 were in-vestigated to determine the source of variability observed in the HCF regime. All specimens had cracks originate at the surface and, more importantly, along the down-skin surface. Fig. 9 shows a representation of the typical fracture surface showing three distinct crack growth zones. The crack growth zones included the initial stable crack growth stage (1, shown in blue1), a quasi-stable crack growth stage (2, shown in red1), and a .nal unstable crack growth stage (3, shown in white1). 
The .rst stage of crack growth includes the crack nucleation and the subsequent stable crack growth. Further investigation revealed that cracks initiated at sharp micro-notches where partially melted powder particles were attached to the specimen surface. A representative crack initiation site is detailed in Fig. 10(a), where the arrows point out two micro-notches at the intersection of partially melted powder particles. As the crack continues to develop in the microstructurally short crack growth stage, crack propagation appears to be a mixture of transgra-nular crack growth across the martensitic 汐∩ grains highlighted in red1 in Fig. 10(a) as well as 汐∩ intergranular crack growth as a result of the .ne acicular 汐∩ grains. In this stage, many cracks initiate on the surface as shown by the blue arrows in Fig. 10(b). Each crack grows in-dependently on a separate plane until they begin to interact with each other and eventually coalesce into a single crack. Once the cracks coalesce to form a large crack, very distinct tear ridges are left behind from the merging cracks on di.erent planes. These tear ridges are in-dicated in Fig.10(b) by the white arrows and extend into the interior of the facture surface in the direction of crack growth. The second stage of crack growth typically occurred immediately after crack coalescence. Once the cracks coalesce into a single large crack, the driving force increases and the stability of the crack growth begins to deteriorate. This crack growth stage consisted of a combina-tion of cyclic and static failure modes resulting in a more tortuous crack path than the .rst crack growth stage. Fig. 11 details a portion of this crack growth stage in which stable fatigue striations, highlighted in blue1, can be seen next to an area that is characterized by ductile tearing across a plane, highlighted in red. There are some secondary cracks that can be seen around this grain, shown by arrows, indicating a mixture of 汐∩ transgranular and prior 汕 intergranular crack growth. As the crack continued to develop in the second stage, the stability of the crack front decreased until it resulted in the .nal unstable crack growth stage. 
1 For interpretation of color in Figs. 4, 9, 10, 11 and 14, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. 

The .nal crack growth stage is characterized by highly unstable crack growth and final rupture of the specimen. Fig. 12 details re-presentative characteristics that occur during this .nal stage. Fig. 12(a) presents an area where the end of a large prior 汕 grain was pulled entirely from the opposite fracture surface indicating a continuing shift to intergranular failure along prior 汕 grains that was .rst observed in the second stage. Secondary cracking and cleavage facets were also observed in this region, as shown in Fig. 12(a). This combination of prior 汕 intergranular failure, cleavage, secondary cracking, and ductile tearing creates an even more tortuous fracture surface than the second crack growth stage. The stability of the crack eventually deteriorated such that .nal rupture occurred causing a small shear lip at the edge of the specimen. This ductile tearing in shear mode is indicated by the equiaxed dimples shown in Fig. 12(b). 
DISCUSSION
4. Discussion 
The initial CGV fatigue results indicated a possible e.ect of surface area on the stress-life for AM specimens in the as-built condition. The fracture surfaces, however, showed a di.erent mechanism behind the shorter fatigue lives of specimens with larger surface area. Speci.cally, the number of initiation sites and their proximity to each other appear to have an e.ect on the fatigue lives among the di.erent geometries. Fig. 13 presents representative fracture surfaces of Geometries 1每3in order of decreasing diameter, (a) being the largest diameter (smallest surface area) and (c) being the smallest diameter (largest surface area). It is worth reminding here that to increase the surface area while holding the volume of the gage section constant, the diameter of the specimen needed to be decreased (see Fig. 
1). Fig. 13 shows that as the diameter of the gage section decreases, the number of initiation sites increases while the distance between the initiation sites decreases. The closer the initiation sites are to each other, the faster the respective cracks begin to interact with each other, eventually coalescing into a single large crack with more driving force. For Geometry 1 (Fig. 13(a)) there is only a single distinct tear ridge with two initiation sites, shown with arrows, relatively far from each other. Comparing this to Fig. 13(b) for Geometry 2, there is still just a single distinct tear ridge, however, the two initiation sites are slightly closer to each other. Finally, Fig. 13(c) for Geometry 3 shows at least four distinct tear ridges with more initiation sites that are even closer in proximity to each other than the Geometry 2 specimen in Fig. 13(b). Additionally, the tear ridges in Fig. 13(c) appear larger in depth resulting in a much more torturous fracture surface in the .rst crack growth stage than in Fig. 13(a) and (b). These observations explain the nearly perfect correlation of the fatigue data for Geometries 4 and 5. For specimens with similar dia-meter, the fatigue lives are mostly consistent for all stress levels, re-gardless of surface area, indicating that the diameter may be more in-.uential to the fatigue behavior than surface area. 
There were also observable di.erences in the crack growth zone of the fracture surfaces between the di.erent geometries. Fig. 14(a) gives a representation of the largest diameter/smallest surface area specimen (Geometry 1) and Fig. 14(b) represents the smallest diameter/largest surface area specimen (Geometry 3), both at a nominal stress amplitude of 300 MPa. In both specimens, the stability of the crack begins to de-teriorate soon after the cracks begin to coalesce which occurs near the end of the tear ridges. The blue stable crack growth zone in Fig. 14(a) is relatively large compared to the total fracture surface area and is ob-servably di.erent than the smaller diameter specimen in Fig. 14(b). The smaller diameter specimen (Fig. 14(b)), on the other hand, has a much smaller ratio of stable crack growth zone (blue) compared to the total fracture surface. Both geometries result in main and secondary cracks that coalesce and transition into the second quasi-stable crack growth zone, however, the size of the stable crack growth zone is smaller than for the smaller diameter specimen. For the smaller diameter specimens, the main and secondary cracks initiate much closer to one another, and therefore, they coalesce and become less stable quicker than the larger diameter specimens. 
The quasi-stable crack growth zone (red) shows somewhat similar behavior for both specimens, beginning at the tear ridge left behind from the two merging cracks and increases in tortuosity up until the unstable crack growth region. The unstable crack growth zone (white), however, is strikingly di.erent between the two specimens. While the crack path in the unstable region appears to be much more tortuous for the smaller diameter specimen, the most notable di.erence is the ratio between the unstable crack growth area and fracture surface area. The smaller specimen has a much larger ratio of unstable crack growth as compared to the larger specimen, indicating that the stability of the crack deteriorates much more quickly for smaller diameter specimens. These results indicate that the diameter of the specimen may a.ect the crack growth behavior as well as the initiation behavior for a given geometry further con.rming that the specimen diameter may have more detrimental e.ects on the fatigue behavior of AM parts than the surface area, which again explains the observations in Figs. 7 and 8. Specimens built at some angle from the vertical direction generally have higher surface roughness on their down-skin surfaces compared to the up-skin surfaces [20,21]. The di.erence in surface roughness may be related to a di.erence in the solidi.ed part volume below the re-spective layer edges which can a.ect the thermal history [21]. It should be noted that the solidi.ed part has signi.cantly higher thermal con-ductivity than the powder bed meaning the majority of heat will be dissipated through the part. This e.ect is visually shown in Fig. 2, where there is more solidi.ed part volume beneath the layer along the up-skin edge to dissipate heat. Conversely, on the down-skin edge, much less solidi.ed part volume exists to dissipate heat, resulting in the layer edge remaining hotter for a longer period of time. The prolonged increased temperature/time can result in additional partially melted powders adhering to the surface which causes the down-skin surface to have a rougher surface [21]. 

Numerical simulations conducted using the model developed by Masoomi et al. [37] 
showed the temperature on the down-skin edge remained above the melting point of Ti-6Al-4V (1604 ∼C) for approxi-mately 0.42 ms. In contrast, the up-skin edge only remains above the melting point for 0.17 ms. These observations and simulation results indicate that the higher roughness on the down-skin surface compared to the up-skin surface is a result of the down-skin edge having less so-lidi.ed part volume underneath to dissipate the supplied heat. 
Additionally, the simulation results indicate that this e.ect can be somewhat alleviated by increasing the part diameter. The increased solidi.ed part volume below the down-skin edge can dissipate the heat more e.ciently which would be evident in the surface roughness measurements amongst the geometries. Parts with su.ciently large diameters should have lower down-skin surface roughness compared to smaller diameter parts. 
Table 1 lists the mean surface roughness values, Ra, obtained for each geometry along with the standard deviations. The results indicate that the roughness for the up-skin surfaces is mostly similar for all geometries ranging from approximately 12每15 米m. The mean down-skin surface roughness, however, shows consistency between Geome-tries 2每5 while Geometry 1 has a surface roughness more comparable to the up-skin surface. In fact, the mean surface roughness is slightly higher for the up-skin surface while the standard deviation for the down-skin roughness is higher. Observation of the down-skin and up-skin surfaces for Geometry 1 also indicates that there are more partially fused powder particles on the down-skin surface, which is believed to a.ect the geometry of the micro-notches introduced by the intersecting particles. The sharpness of the micro-notches of intersecting powder particles as shown in Fig. 10(a) increases the likelihood of crack 
Table 1 
Average roughness and gage diameter measurements for as built geometries considered in this study. 
initiation occurring on the down-skin surface, even if the surface roughness is similar to the up-skin surface. Increasing roughness values on the down-skin surface, however, proves to be even more detrimental to the fatigue resistance as indicated by the stress-life curves for Geo-metries 2每5 as compared to Geometry 1 in Fig. 8(b). 
An ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey analysis of the surface roughness data showed a signi.cant di.erence between the down-skin and up-skin surfaces for Geometries 2每5. Similar up-skin roughness values were shown for all geometries, but only Geometry 1 had a similar down-skin roughness compared to the up-skin roughness (Table 1). Geometries 2每5 exhibited signi.cantly di.erent surface roughness values between the up-and down-skin surfaces. This .nding validated the previously described thermal simulation results for larger diameter sections. These results are visually presented in the box plot in Fig. 15 showing the spread of the Ra measurements for each specimen geometry and a re-latively larger diameter (9.5 mm) obtained from the grip section of an untested specimen. The boxes for each surface indicate the interquartile range of the surface roughness measurements, such that they can be a visual indication of statistical di.erence between two data sets. From this analysis the larger grip diameter was similar to Geometry 1 in which the down-skin surface roughness was statistically similar to the up-skin surface roughness while the up-skin and down-skin surfaces for Geometries 2每5 were mostly statistically di.erent. Geometry 3 does show some overlap between the up-skin and down-skin measurements, however, the trend of the large di.erences in the roughness between each surface is still apparent. Additionally, the box plot indicates that diameters above 4.90 mm begin to have down-skin surface roughness more similar to the up-skin surface which is most likely related to the lower amount of time spent above the melting temperature for larger diameter parts. 
The statistical surface roughness analysis explained some key dif-ferences in the low cycle fatigue behavior (nominal 考a ≡ 200 MPa) for the given geometries tested. Geometry 1, which has the smallest surface area and coincidentally the largest gage diameter, showed better fatigue performance as compared to Geometries 2每5, as previously shown in Figs. 7 and 8. Therefore, the lower number of crack initiation sites observed for Geometry 1 specimens with larger gage diameter, can most likely can be explained by the decreased di.erence in surface roughness between the up-skin and down-skin surfaces of the specimen. Geometries 2每5, on the other hand, had similar roughness values on their down-skin portions which explains the similar low-cycle fatigue behavior observed amongst these geometries. 
The increased surface roughness on the down-skin surfaces for Geometries 2每5, compared to Geometry 1, was attributed to an in-creased number of partially fused powder particles on the down-skin surfaces, resulting in lower fatigue resistance. As previously discussed, a combination of partially fused powder particles on the surfaces may create a series of sharp micro-notches across these surfaces. The in-creased number of micro-notches created on the down-skin surfaces, as compared to the up-skin surfaces, is believed to be the reason for the decreases shown in fatigue life. Essentially, sharp micro-notches will initiate cracks earlier or in greater quantities for surfaces that have a higher surface roughness (i.e. Geometries 2每5). In this case, this in-creased surface roughness for Geometries 2每5 is related to the smaller diameter specimens and is attributed to the amount of time the layer edge remains above the melting point. 
Interestingly, while the low cycle fatigue behavior can be explained well by the surface roughness, the scatter and reduced fatigue strength in the high cycle regime (nominal 考a ≒ 100 MPa) were not addressed. From Fig. 8(a) it appears that AM parts in the high cycle regime are more sensitive to diameter. Geometries 2每5 all have similar roughness values and, by the previous argument, should therefore have similar fatigue lives, if only the surface roughness is considered. Considering the fact that the initial cross-sectional measurements may not give the actual representation of the load-bearing cross-section, the e.ect of the gage diameter can be easily understood in regards to the surface roughness. As the specimen＊s diameter decreases, the di.erence be-tween the load-bearing cross-section and the initial measured cross-section becomes larger. The di.erence in load-bearing cross-section and initial measured cross-section was previously shown on a fracture sur-face in Fig. 
4. This over-estimation of the cross-section results in in-creasingly higher applied stress amplitudes (as compared to the nom-inal 100 MPa fatigue limit) which yields fatigue failure before 107 cycles. Fig. 16 presents fatigue lives for tests that had an initial esti-mated (nominal) stress amplitude of 100 MPa based on the initial measured diameter using a caliper. The hollow data points in this .gure represent failed specimens and the .lled data point was a runout test. As the applied stress amplitudes approach 110 MPa, a sharp bend in the stress life data occurs resulting in the large scatter observed in the high cycle fatigue regime. Essentially a fatigue limit of approximately 110 MPa exists above which failure typically occurs before 107 cycles. Geometries with smaller cross-sectional diameters are more a.ected by the higher surface roughness resulting in an applied stress amplitude that is considerably higher than the preset nominal stress amplitude of 100 MPa. These results explain the scatter observed for the HCF data showing surface roughness can be more detrimental to smaller diameter specimens where the over-estimation of the cross-sectional area results in a greater applied stress. 
The fatigue behavior of AM Ti-6Al-4V specimens fabricated diag-onally were mostly a.ected by the down-skin surface roughness. For geometries with cross-sectional diameters larger than 4.90 mm, the down-skin surface roughness was more comparable to the up-skin surface roughness, resulting in an improved fatigue performance at all stress levels. Furthermore, smaller cross-sectional diameter specimens were more in.uenced by the surface roughness in the HCF regime re-sulting in higher applied stresses and lower fatigue lives. The fatigue behavior of the di.erent geometries was also shown to be a.ected by the crack growth and crack coalescence characteristics. Larger diameter specimens had larger portions of stable crack growth as multiple crack initiation sites were further apart requiring more fatigue cycles before crack coalescence occurred. The smaller diameter specimens, on the other hand, had crack coalescence occurring earlier due to the close proximity of the crack imitation sites. 
CONCLUSION
5. Conclusions 
The effects of surface area, surface roughness, and gage diameter on the fatigue behavior of as-built L-PBF Ti-6Al-4V parts fabricated at 45∼ 
(i.e. diagonal direction) were investigated in this study. Through sev-eral experimental observations and measurements of the micro-structure, surface characteristics, fatigue behavior, and fracture sur-faces, the following conclusions can be made: 
1. Initial results indicated that surface area may a.ect the fatigue re-sistance of the varying geometries. However, when the applied stress was corrected by only considering the load-bearing cross-section, no signi.cant e.ect of increasing surface area on the fatigue behavior was observed for the as-built additive manufactured spe-cimens within the diameter range examined in this study. 
2. The crack initiation behavior was found to be highly sensitive to surface roughness, where all cracks initiated on the rougher down-skin surface. Specimens with lower down-skin surface roughness showed a superior fatigue resistance as compared to specimens with higher down-skin surface roughness. This result is important for parts that are built diagonally or with overhangs as the higher down-skin surface roughness will be more susceptible to crack in-itiation causing a lower fatigue resistance. 
3. The crack growth behavior was shown to be a.ected by the cross-sectional diameter with smaller diameter parts having multiple crack initiation sites closer to each other. The proximity of the multiple cracks results in much earlier crack coalescence which deteriorates the crack growth stability resulting in a lower fatigue life. 
4. A gage diameter larger than 4.90 mm resulted in significantly lower surface roughness for down-skin surfaces due to the larger solidi.ed part volume beneath the layer edge, thus dissipating the supplied heat more e.ciently. This result indicates that the e.ect of the high down-skin surface roughness can be minimized by increasing the part thickness/size at diagonally built surfaces. 
5. Thee.ect of surface roughness on the high cycle fatigue behavior was found to be greater for specimens with smaller gage diameters. Similar surface roughness on decreasing gage diameters resulted in an increasing overestimation of the load-bearing cross-section. Therefore, the applied stress was higher and yielded shorter fatigue lives in the high cycle fatigue regime. 
The fatigue limit of the as-built additive manufactured Ti-6Al-4V 
specimens was approximately 110 MPa which is signi.cantly lower than the 550每750 MPa range for wrought Ti-6Al-4V. The surface roughness, introducing many micro-notches along the surface, most likely has signi.cant contribution to the reduced fatigue strength of additive manufactured Ti-6Al-4V specimens. 
These results highlight the importance of understanding the spe-cimen property to part performance relationships of AM parts subjected to cyclic loading. Fatigue data is typically generated in the laboratory on standard size specimens with uniform gage sections, while the in-service parts can have di.erent size, geometry, layer orientation, sur-face roughness, and more. Not only can a structural part experience very di.erent thermal history than the standard specimen, but the thermal history may even vary from point to point of a part depending of its geometry complexity. Any variations in thermal history can a.ect the resulting microstructure, porosity level and surface roughness, which in turn will a.ect the part performance. This raises serious concerns regarding applicability of mechanical properties generated in the laboratory from standard size specimens to design and evaluate load-bearing structures and components. Therefore, there is a critical need to better understand the specimen property to part performance relationships as well as to develop appropriate standards speci.cto additive manufacturing technology and challenges. 
Acknowledgement 
Partial funding for this work was provided by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1657195. Supports from the Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) is also greatly appreciated. Authors also acknowledge the support of Mohammad Masoomi from Auburn University for performing all the simulations of this study. 








